# Vision Mamba: Efficient Visual Representation Learning with Bidirectional State Space Model

# Research questions
Q1: Can a generic pure-state space model (SSM) backbone network effectively handle dense prediction tasks in vision without relying on self-attention?

Contribution: 
Recently the state space models (SSMs) with efficient hardware-aware designs, i.e., the Mamba deep learning model, have shown great potential for long sequence modeling. Meanwhile building efficient and generic vision backbones purely upon SSMs is an appealing direction. However, representing visual data is challenging for SSMs due to the position-sensitivity of visual data and the requirement of global context for visual understanding. In this paper, we show that the reliance on self-attention for visual representation learning is not necessary and propose a new generic vision backbone with bidirectional Mamba blocks (Vim), which marks the image sequences with position embeddings and compresses the visual representation with bidirectional state space models. On ImageNet classification, COCO object detection, and ADE20k

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning , Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

semantic segmentation tasks, Vim achieves higher performance compared to well-established vision transformers like DeiT, while also demonstrating significantly improved computation & memory efficiency. For example, Vim is 2.8 × faster than DeiT and saves 86.8% GPU memory when performing batch inference to extract features on images with a resolution of 1248 × 1248. The results demonstrate that Vim is capable of overcoming the computation & memory constraints on performing Transformer-style understanding for high-resolution images and it has great potential to be the next-generation backbone for vision foundation models.

Recent research advancements have led to a surge of interest in the state space model (SSM). Originating from the classic Kalman filter model (Kalman, 1960), modern SSMs excel at capturing long-range dependencies and benefit from parallel training. Some SSM-based methods, such as the linear state-space layers (LSSL) (Gu et al., 2021b), structured state space sequence model (S4) (Gu et al., 2021a), diagonal state space (DSS) (Gupta et al., 2022), and S4D (Gu et al., 2022), are proposed to process sequence data across a wide range of tasks and modalities, particularly on modeling long-range dependencies. They are efficient in processing long sequences because of convolutional computation and near-linear computation. 2-D SSM (Baron et al., 2023), SGConvNeXt (Li et al., 2022b), and ConvSSM (Smith et al., 2023a) combine SSM with CNN or Transformer architecture to process 2-D data.

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved great success in visual representation learning, excelling in large-scale self-supervised pre-training and high performance on downstream tasks. Compared with convolutional neural networks, the core advantage lies in that ViT can provide each image patch with data/patch-dependent global context through selfattention. This differs from convolutional networks that use the same parameters, i.e., the convolutional filters, for all positions. Another advantage is the modality-agnostic modeling by treating an image as a sequence of patches without 2D inductive bias, which makes it the preferred architecture for multimodal applications (Bavishi et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). At the same time, the self-attention mechanism in Transformers poses challenges in terms of speed and memory usage when dealing with long-range visual dependencies, e.g., processing high-resolution images.

Motivated by the success of Mamba in language modeling, it is appealing that we can also transfer this success from language to vision, i.e., to design a generic and efficient visual backbone with the advanced SSM method. However, there are two challenges for Mamba, i.e., unidirectional modeling and lack of positional awareness. To address these challenges, we propose the Vision Mamba (Vim) model, which incorporates the bidirectional SSMs for data-dependent global visual context modeling and position embeddings for location-aware visual recognition.

Q2: How does the proposed Vision Mamba (Vim) model address the computation & memory constraints on performing Transformer-style understanding for high-resolution images?

## Problem Statement, Methods and Main Results
 Showcase the efficiency and effectiveness of Vim on standard computer vision benchmarks.

#### Keywords: State Space Model, Vision Transformers, Bidirectional SSMs, Efficient Visual Backbones, Image Classification, Semantic Segmentation


### [Link to paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.09417v3)
