## Abstract

Large Language Models (LLMs) have unlocked new capabilities and applications; however, evaluating the alignment with human preferences still poses significant challenges. To address this issue, we introduce Chatbot Arena, an open platform for evaluating LLMs based on human preferences. Our methodology employs a pairwise comparison approach and leverages input from a diverse user base through crowdsourcing. The platform has been operational for several months, amassing over 240K votes. This paper describes the platform, analyzes the data we have collected so far, and explains the tried-and-true statistical methods we are using for efficient and accurate evaluation and ranking of models. We confirm that the crowdsourced questions are sufficiently diverse and discriminating and that the crowdsourced human votes are in good agreement with those of expert raters. These analyses collectively establish a robust foundation for the credibility of Chatbot Arena. Because of its unique value and openness, Chatbot Arena has emerged as one of the most referenced LLM leaderboards, widely cited by leading LLM developers and companies. Our demo is publicly available at https://chat.lmsys.org .

## 1. Introduction

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have significantly expanded their capabilities beyond traditional natural language processing boundaries, addressing a broad array of general tasks (OpenAI, 2023; Gemini et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). These developments underscore the potential of LLMs but also have raised concerns with respect to performance evaluation. Current benchmarks often fail to capture the nuanced and diverse aspects of these models, particularly in assessing their alignment with human

Figure 1. Classification of LLM benchmarks: We categorize along two dimensions: whether the questions are from a static dataset or a live, fresh source, and whether the evaluation metric relies on ground truth or (approximated) human preferences. MMLU(Hendrycks et al., 2020), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), GSM-8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023b), and AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023) are common examples of static benchmarks. Chatbot Arena is the platform introduced in this paper.

<!-- image -->

preferences in real-world, open-ended tasks.

To assess the performance of LLMs, the research community has introduced a variety of benchmarks. These benchmarks can be categorized based on two factors: the source of questions (either static or live) and the evaluation metric (either ground truth or human preference). According to these factors, benchmarks can be classified into four categories, as shown in Figure 1. While a range of benchmarks is beneficial, the most prevalent current method for evaluating LLMs remains a static, ground-truth-based evaluation, partly because such evaluations are inexpensive and reproducible.

However, these static, ground-truth-based benchmarks exhibit several limitations. Firstly, the questions within these benchmarks are not open-ended, hindering the ability to capture the flexible and interactive use found in real-world settings (Zheng et al., 2023b). Secondly, the test sets in these benchmarks are static, meaning they can become contaminated over time, which undermines the reliability of the evaluation results (Yang et al., 2023). Furthermore, for many complex tasks, establishing a definitive ground truth is not only challenging but sometimes unattainable. Consequently, current benchmarks fail to adequately address the needs of state-of-the-art LLMs, particularly in evaluating user preferences. Thus, there is an urgent necessity for an open, live evaluation platform based on human preference that can more accurately mirror real-world usage.

Creating such a benchmark platform entails significant challenges. It requires the collection of live, fresh, and diverse user questions to accurately represent real-world scenarios.

Additionally, developing scalable, incremental, and efficient ranking systems is essential for evaluating a large number of models. Moreover, ensuring the quality of human evaluations is crucial given the noisy nature of human preferences.

To this end, we introduce Chatbot Arena, a benchmarking platform for LLMs that features anonymous, randomized battles in a crowdsourced setting. Chatbot Arena is a free website open to all users. 1 On this website, a user can ask a question and get answers from two anonymous LLMs. Afterward, the user casts a vote for the model that delivers the preferred response, with the models' identities revealed only after voting. This crowdsourced method effectively gathers a diverse array of fresh user prompts, accurately reflecting real-world LLM applications. Armed with this data, we employ a suite of powerful statistical techniques, ranging from the statistical model of Bradley & Terry (1952) to the E-values of Vovk & Wang (2021), to estimate the ranking over models as reliably and sample-efficiently as possible. With these tools in hand, we have designed efficient sampling algorithms specifically to select model pairs in a way that accelerates the convergence of rankings while retaining statistical validity.

We conduct a thorough analysis of the collected data to ensure the credibility of our platform. We demonstrate that the user-generated questions are sufficiently diverse to encompass a wide range of LLM use cases and are sufficiently challenging to differentiate between models. Furthermore, we confirm that the crowd-sourced votes are highly consistent with expert evaluations.

We have been running our system since Apr 2023 and have received over 240K votes from about 90K users in over 100 different languages as of Jan 2024. To encourage user engagement, we have made over 50 state-of-the-art models available for free. We also collaborate with leading model developers such as OpenAI, Google, Anthropic, Mistral, Hugging Face, and various universities, incorporating their latest models into our platform. We keep the community engaged by routinely updating the leaderboard, publishing analytical blogs, releasing datasets, and sharing information via tweets. Because of its unique and significant value, our leaderboard has emerged as one of the most referenced in the LLM field and has become a benchmark for the industry. We commit to making our data and code available, ensuring that this platform is open-source and open-accessible.

We make the following contributions:

- · We build the first large-scale crowd-sourced live LLM evaluation platform with over 1M users visit. 2

- · We conduct an in-depth analysis of the collected data, including prompt diversity, quality, vote quality, and insights on human feedback.
- · We will publicly release a human preference dataset with over 100K pairwise votes collected from Chatbot Arena.
- · We design an efficient sampling algorithm that actively chooses which model pairs to show, such that our sample efficiency improves, sometimes to a large degree.

## 8. Discussion

Limitations. Although our user base is extensive, we anticipate that it will primarily consist of LLM hobbyists and researchers who are eager to experiment with and evaluate the latest LLMs. This inclination may result in a biased distribution of users. Additionally, despite the wide array of topics encompassed by the prompts discussed in previous sections, the data predominantly comes from our online chat interface. This source might not accurately reflect the real-world usage of LLMs in production environments or specialized domains, potentially leading to a skewed prompt distribution. Moreover, our study concentrates on assessing the helpfulness of LLMs but overlooks their safety aspects. We recognize the possibility and necessity of a parallel

mechanism to evaluate the safety of these models.

Future Directions. In our future work, we plan to develop comprehensive topic leaderboards and establish a dedicated section for multimodal and agent-based LLMs in more dynamic, gamified settings, catering to more complex tasks. We also believe our approach to detecting harmful users could be improved and made more formally rigorous by using the theory of nonnegative supermartingales and Evalues (Howard et al., 2020; Waudby-Smith & Ramdas, 2020; Vovk & Wang, 2021; Ramdas et al., 2023); this would deal with the dependence, but the variants we tried did not perform well in terms of power.

## 9. Conclusion

In this paper, we present Chatbot Arena, an open platform for evaluating LLMs through crowdsourced, pairwise human preferences. We conduct an in-depth analysis of the crowdsourced user prompts and preference votes to validate the diversity and quality. We develop an efficient model sampling and ranking algorithm. Our dataset including 100K pairwise preference votes will be released for future research.

## A. Confidence Interval Simulation Study

We conduct a simulation study to evaluate the bootstrap confidence intervals versus the sandwich estimator. To a large extent, both intervals are the same-indeed, their intervals are often identical to the naked eye. Nonetheless, in our experiments, there are some differences. First, in Figure 13, we conduct a replay study using the same 213576 data points mentioned in the main text.

We also do a suite of experiments in simulation using the same beta generating process as in the main text, with γ = 2 . The result is shown in Figure 14; results are similar across many choices of the parameter γ and the model strength, which indicates that both intervals will have good coverage and width in the practical conditions we would expose them to.

