## Abstract

Recent advances in deep learning have relied heavily on the use of large Transformers due to their ability to learn at scale. However, the core building block of Transformers, the attention operator, exhibits quadratic cost in sequence length, limiting the amount of context accessible. Existing subquadratic methods based on low-rank and sparse approximations need to be combined with dense attention layers to match Transformers, indicating a gap in capability. In this work, we propose Hyena , a subquadratic drop-in replacement for attention constructed by interleaving implicitly parametrized long convolutions and data-controlled gating . In recall and reasoning tasks on sequences of thousands to hundreds of thousands of tokens, Hyena improves accuracy by more than 50 points over operators relying on statespaces and other implicit and explicit methods, matching attention-based models. We set a new state-ofthe-art for dense-attention-free architectures on language modeling in standard datasets ( WikiText103 and The Pile ), reaching Transformer quality with a 20% reduction in training compute required at sequence length 2 K. Hyena operators are twice as fast as highly optimized attention at sequence length 8 K, and 100 × faster at sequence length 64 K.

## 1 Introduction

Large Transformers have enabled a number of breakthrough advances in modeling language, vision, audio, biology and numerous other domains (Vaswani et al., 2017), (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), (Radford et al., 2022), (Cramer, 2021). Much of the success of Transformers, powered by the attention operator (Vaswani et al., 2017), relies on their scaling properties (Hoffmann et al., 2022) and the emergence of in-context learning (Garg et al., 2022), which allows them to generalize to unseen data and tasks given context as input. The Transformer block is a powerful tool for sequence modeling, but it is not without its limitations. One of the most notable is the computational cost, which grows rapidly as the length of the input sequence increases. Specifically, the cost scales quadratically with the length L of the sequence, which places a strict limit on the amount of context that can be considered by the model. Breaking the quadratic barrier is a key step towards new possibilities for deep learning, such as using entire textbooks as context, generating long-form music or processing gigapixel scale images.

Efforts to reduce the computational cost of attention in models primarily involve the use of linearized, low-rank, and sparse approximations (Child et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Kitaev et al., 2020; Zhai et al., 2021; Roy et al., 2021; Schlag et al., 2021; Tu et al., 2022). These approaches introduce a trade-off between expressivity and speed, requiring hybridization with standard attention layers to reach Transformer quality (Mehta et al., 2022; Dao et al., 2022c).

A growing amount of evidence suggests that attention mechanisms only utilize a small portion of their quadratic capabilities for language processing (Olsson et al., 2022; Dao et al., 2022c), leading us to question its role as the gold-standard operator for deep learning at scale. Specifically, we ask: Are there subquadratic operators that can match the quality of attention at scale?

Figure 1.1: The Hyena operator is defined as a recurrence of two efficient subquadratic primitives: an implicit long convolution h (i.e. Hyena filters parameterized by a feed-forward network) and multiplicative elementwise gating of the (projected) input. The depth of the recurrence specifies the size of the operator. Hyena can equivalently be expressed as a multiplication with data-controlled (conditioned by the input u ) diagonal matrices D x and Toeplitz matrices S h . In addition, Hyena exhibits sublinear parameter scaling (in sequence length) and unrestricted context, similar to attention, while having lower time complexity.

<!-- image -->

We obtain a positive answer based on a composition of efficient subquadratic primitives, such as elementwise multiplication (gating) and long convolutions i.e., convolutions with filter sizes as long as the input. We rely on a set of targeted reasoning tasks, grounded in recent work on mechanistic interpretability (Elhage et al., 2021; Power et al., 2022; Olsson et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022) such as recall and induction, to distill three properties of attention correlated with its performance and the quality gap with existing subquadratic approaches:

- a. Data control: Attention implements an expressive data-controlled (Massaroli et al., 2020) linear operator 1 , encoding an entire family of linear functions in a single block.
- b. Sublinear parameter scaling: Parameter counts of attention layers are decoupled from sequence length, allowing Transformers to allocate more parameters elsewhere e.g., the feed-forward neural networks ( FFN s) between attention layers.
- c. Unrestricted context: For a given input, attention has an unrestricted context i.e., it can approximate dependencies between any two inputs, without arbitrary restrictions such as locality (except in cases using masking such as autoregressive models).

The Hyena hierarchy Guided by these findings, we introduce the Hyena hierarchy, an operator defined by a recurrence of two efficient subquadratic primitives: a long convolution and element-wise multiplicative gating (see Figure 1.1). A specified depth (i.e., number of steps) of the recurrence controls the size of the operator. For short recurrences, existing models are recovered as special cases (Mehta et al., 2022; Dao et al., 2022c). By mapping each step in the Hyena recurrence to its corresponding matrix form, we reveal Hyena operators to be equivalently defined as a decomposition of a data-controlled matrix i.e., a matrix whose entries are functions of the input. Furthermore, we show how Hyena operators can be evaluated efficiently without materializing the full matrix, by leveraging fast convolution algorithms (Selesnick and Burrus, 2017). Empirically, Hyena operators are able to significantly shrink the quality gap with attention at scale, reaching similar perplexity and downstream performance with a smaller computational budget (Section 4.2) and without hybridization of attention.

Narrowing the capabilities gap The design of Hyena is motivated by a quality gap between standard dense attention and alternative subquadratic operators, which we identify by focusing on reasoning tasks correlated with language modeling performance at scale. We extend the suite of basic mechanistic interpretability benchmarks ( induction and recall ) with additional tasks that probe how quickly model performance degrades

when task complexity increases (e.g. vocabulary size grows). In addition, we investigate the optimal parameterization of long convolutions in Hyena . In the most challenging settings with hundreds of thousands of tokens, our implicit parameterization scheme improves over other operators leveraging state spaces (Gu et al., 2021), frequency-domain parametrizations (Li et al., 2020), or standard convolutions by over 50% accuracy.

Scaling in language and vision Next, we aim to verify whether rankings in our reasoning benchmark suite are predictive of quality at scale. We test Hyena on autoregressive language modeling at the sub-billion parameter scale, setting a new state-of-the-art for dense-attention-free architectures in standard datasets ( WikiText103 and The Pile ) and matching Transformer quality. On the The Pile at the 335 M parameter scale, we match Transformer perplexity with a 20% reduction in the total count of floating point operations (FLOPs). As an extension, we investigate the generality of Hyena operators by testing on large-scale image recognition, replacing attention in the Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). In image classification, Hyena is able to match attention in accuracy when training on ImageNet-1k from scratch.

Toward much longer context Finally, we benchmark the efficiency of Hyena on long sequences. We measure 5 x speedups over dense self-attention at length 8192 -2 x over highly optimized FlashAttention 2 (Dao et al., 2022b) - and 100 x speedup over FlashAttention at sequence lengths of 64 k, where standard attention implementation in PyTorch runs out of memory.

## 5 Discussion and Conclusion

In this work, we introduced an attention-free drop-in replacement to the core building block of many largescale language models. Hyena operators are a recurrence of gating and implicitly parametrized long convolutions, can be evaluated efficiently in subquadratic time, and can learn in-context on very long sequences. On The Pile , deep stacks of Hyena operators constitute one of the first attention-free, convolutional architectures to match perplexity and downstream performance of Transformers with a significant reduction in training compute. Our promising results at the sub-billion parameter scale suggest that attention may not be all we need, and that simpler subquadratic designs such as Hyena , informed by a set of simple guiding principles and evaluation on mechanistic interpretability benchmarks, may form the basis for efficient large models. We are excited about what new capabilities Hyena opens up as we scale and optimize the inference speed of these models.

## A Experimental Details

An implementation of Hyena can be found at this link.

## B Theoretical Results and Details



