## ABSTRACT

We study how in-context learning (ICL) in language models is affected by semantic priors versus input-label mappings. We investigate two setups-ICL with flipped labels and ICL with semantically-unrelated labels-across various model families (GPT-3, InstructGPT, Codex, PaLM, and Flan-PaLM). First, experiments on ICL with flipped labels show that overriding semantic priors is an emergent ability of model scale. While small language models ignore flipped labels presented in-context and thus rely primarily on semantic priors from pretraining, large models can override semantic priors when presented with in-context exemplars that contradict priors, despite the stronger semantic priors that larger models may hold. We next study semantically-unrelated label ICL (SUL-ICL), in which labels are semantically unrelated to their inputs (e.g., foo/bar instead of negative/positive), thereby forcing language models to learn the input-label mappings shown in incontext exemplars in order to perform the task. The ability to do SUL-ICL also emerges primarily with scale, and large-enough language models can even perform linear classification in a SUL-ICL setting. Finally, we evaluate instruction-tuned models and find that instruction tuning strengthens both the use of semantic priors and the capacity to learn input-label mappings, but more of the former.

## 1 INTRODUCTION

Language models can perform a range of downstream NLP tasks via in-context learning (ICL), where models are given a few exemplars of input-label pairs as part of the prompt before performing the task on an unseen example (Brown et al., 2020, inter alia ). To successfully perform ICL, models can (a) mostly use semantic prior knowledge to predict labels while following the format of in-context exemplars (e.g., seeing 'positive sentiment' and 'negative sentiment' as labels and performing sentiment analysis using prior knowledge) and/or (b) learn the input-label mappings from the presented exemplars (e.g., finding a pattern that positive reviews should be mapped to one label, and negative reviews should be mapped to a different label). Prior work on which of these factors drives performance is mixed. For instance, although Min et al. (2022b) showed that presenting random ground truth mappings in-context does not substantially affect performance (suggesting that models primarily rely on semantic prior knowledge), other work has shown that transformers in simple settings (without language modeling pretraining) implement learning algorithms such as ridge regression and gradient descent (Akyürek et al., 2023; von Oswald et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2022).

Figure 1: An overview of flipped-label ICL and semantically-unrelated label ICL (SUL-ICL), compared with regular ICL. Flipped-label ICL uses flipped targets, forcing the model override semantic priors in order to follow the in-context exemplars. SUL-ICL uses targets that are not semantically related to the task, which means that models must learn input-label mappings in order to perform the task because they can no longer rely on the semantics of natural language targets.

<!-- image -->

In this paper, we study how these two factors-semantic priors and input-label mappings-interact in several experimental settings (see Figure 1 for an example of each setting):

- 1. In regular ICL , both semantic priors and input-label mappings can allow the model to perform in-context learning successfully.
- 2. In flipped-label ICL , all labels in the exemplars are flipped, which means that semantic prior knowledge and input-label mappings disagree. Labels for the evaluation set stay the same, so for binary classification tasks, performing better than 50% accuracy in this setting means that the model is unable to override semantic priors, and performing below 50% accuracy means that the model is able to learn input-label mappings and override semantic priors.
- 3. In semantically-unrelated label ICL (SUL-ICL), the labels are semantically unrelated to the task (e.g., for sentiment analysis, we use 'foo/bar' instead of 'negative/positive'). Since the semantic priors from labels are removed, the model can only perform ICL by using input-label mappings.

We run experiments in these settings spanning multiple model families with varying sizes, training data, and instruction tuning (GPT-3, InstructGPT, Codex, PaLM, Flan-PaLM) in order to analyze the interplay between semantic priors and input-label mappings, paying special attention to how results change with respect to model scale. First, we examine flipped-label ICL, where we find that small models do not change their predictions when seeing flipped labels, but large models can flip their predictions to follow flipped exemplars (Section 3). This means that the ability to override semantic priors with input-label mappings emerges with model scale, which should not be taken for granted because larger models presumably have stronger priors that are more challenging to override.

Second, we compare the SUL-ICL setting to regular ICL (Section 4). We find that small language models experience a large performance drop when semantic priors are removed, whereas large language models can perform the task well even without semantic priors from the labels. For some datasets, doing better than random in the SUL-ICL setting required substantial scaling (e.g., only PaLM-540B achieves above-random performance). We also found this to be true for high-dimensional linear classification tasks (Section 6). This means that learning input-label mappings without being given semantic priors is also an emergent ability of large language models for those tasks.

Finally, we study the effect of instruction tuning (Min et al., 2022a; Wei et al., 2022a; Chung et al., 2022) on ICL abilities (Section 5). We find that instruction-tuned models achieve better performance than pretraining-only models on SUL-ICL settings, which means that instruction tuning increases the model's ability to learn input-label mappings. On the other hand, we also see that instruction-tuned models are more reluctant to follow flipped labels, which means that instruction tuning decreases the model's ability to override semantic priors more than it increases its ability to learn input-label mappings. Overall, our work aims to shed light on the interaction between semantic prior knowledge and input-label mappings while considering the effects of scaling and instruction tuning.

## 2 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP



## 2.3 ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

As additional experimental details, we follow the prior literature on in-context learning and use a different set of few-shot exemplars for each inference example (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023, inter alia ). By default, we use k = 16 in-context exemplars per class, though we also experiment with varying number of exemplars in Section 4 and Appendix C.2. We also use the 'Input/Output' template for prompts shown in Figure 9, with ablations for input format shown in Appendix B.4 and Appendix B.5, and the semantically-unrelated 'Foo'/'Bar' targets as shown in Figure 9 (ablations for target type are shown in Appendix B.3). Finally, to reduce inference costs, we use 100 randomly sampled evaluation examples per dataset, as it is more beneficial to experiment with a more-diverse range of datasets and model families than it is to include more evaluation examples per dataset, and our research questions depend more on general behaviors than on small performance deltas (note that all y -axes in our plots go from 0-100).

## 8 CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we examined the extent to which language models learn in-context by utilizing prior knowledge learned during pretraining versus input-label mappings presented in-context. We first showed that large language models can learn to override semantic priors when presented with enough flipped labels (i.e., input-label mappings that contradict prior knowledge), and that this ability emerges with model scale. We then created an experimental setup that we call SemanticallyUnrelated Label In-Context Learning (SUL-ICL) which removes semantic meaning from labels by replacing natural language targets with semantically-unrelated targets. Successfully doing ICL in the SUL-ICL setup is another emergent ability of model scale. Additionally, we analyzed instructiontuned language models and found that instruction tuning improves the capacity to learn input-label mappings but also strengthens semantic priors. Finally, we examined language model performance on linear classification tasks, finding that successfully performing high-dimensional linear classification emerges with model scale. These results underscore how the in-context learning behavior of language models can change depending on the scale of the language model, and that larger language models have an emergent ability to map inputs to many types of labels, a form of true symbolic reasoning in which input-label mappings can be learned for arbitrary symbols.

## B INVESTIGATING THE SUL-ICL SETUP



