## Abstract

We introduce phi-3-mini , a 3.8 billion parameter language model trained on 3.3 trillion tokens, whose overall performance, as measured by both academic benchmarks and internal testing, rivals that of models such as Mixtral 8x7B and GPT-3.5 (e.g., phi-3-mini achieves 69% on MMLU and 8.38 on MT-bench), despite being small enough to be deployed on a phone. Our training dataset is a scaled-up version of the one used for phi-2 , composed of heavily filtered publicly available web data and synthetic data. The model is also further aligned for robustness, safety, and chat format. We also provide parameter-scaling results with a 7B, 14B models trained for 4.8T tokens, called phi3-small , phi-3-medium , both significantly more capable than phi-3-mini (e.g., respectively 75%, 78% on MMLU, and 8.7, 8.9 on MT-bench). To enhance multilingual, multimodal, and long-context capabilities, we introduce three models in the phi-3.5 series: phi-3.5-mini , phi-3.5-MoE , and phi3.5-Vision . The phi-3.5-MoE , a 16 x 3.8B MoE model with 6.6 billion active parameters, achieves superior performance in language reasoning, math, and code tasks compared to other open-source models of similar scale, such as Llama 3.1 and the Mixtral series, and on par with Gemini-1.5-Flash and GPT-4o-mini. Meanwhile, phi-3.5-Vision , a 4.2 billion parameter model derived from phi-3.5mini , excels in reasoning tasks and is adept at handling both single-image and text prompts, as well as multi-image and text prompts.

## 1 Introduction

The striking progress of AI in the last few years can be largely attributed to major efforts throughout the world towards scaling-up to ever-larger models and datasets. Large Language Models (LLMs) have steadily increased in size from a mere billion parameters just five years ago (GPT-2 had 1.5 billion parameters [RWC + 19]) to trillion parameters today. The impetus for this effort originates in the seemingly predictable improvement one obtains by training large models, the so-called scaling laws [KMH + 20, HBM + 22, MRB + 23]. However these laws assume a 'fixed' data source. This assumption is now significantly disrupted by the existence of frontier LLMs themselves, which allow us to interact with data in novel ways. In our previous works on the phi models [GZA + 23, LBE + 23, JBA + 23] it was shown that a combination of LLM-based filtering of publicly available web data, and LLM-created synthetic data, enable performance in smaller language models that were typically seen only in much larger models. For example our previous model trained on this data recipe, phi-2 (2.7B parameters), matched the performance of models 25 times larger trained on regular data. In this report we present a new model, phi-3-mini (3.8B parameters), trained for 3.3T tokens on larger and more advanced versions of the datasets used in phi-2 . With its small size, phi-3-mini can easily be inferenced locally on a modern phone (see Figure 2), yet it achieves a quality that seems on-par with models such as Mixtral 8x7B [JSR + 24] and GPT-3.5.

User: Explain why it is surprising that one can build a language model small enough to fit on a phone, yet almost as powerful as ChatGPT. Just use one funny sentence.

phi-3-mini: It's like fitting a supercomputer in a flip phone, but instead of breaking the phone, it just breaks the internet with its tiny, yet mighty, linguistic prowess!

User: Okay now more serious answer, and note that this was achieved solely by changing the training data.

phi-3-mini: The development of a compact language model that rivals the capabilities of ChatGPT, while fitting on a phone, is a testament to the power of data-driven machine learning. By meticulously curating and optimizing the training dataset, researchers can significantly reduce the model's size without compromising its performance. [...]

## 2 Technical Specifications

The phi-3-mini model is a transformer decoder architecture [VSP + 17], with default context length 4 K . We also introduce a long context version via LongRope [DZZ + 24a] that extends the context length to 128 K , called phi-3-mini-128K .

To best benefit the open source community, phi-3-mini is built upon a similar block structure as Llama-2 [TLI + 23] and uses the same tokenizer with vocabulary size of 32064 1 . This means that all packages developed for Llama-2 family of models can be directly adapted to phi-3-mini . The model uses 3072 hidden dimension, 32 heads and 32 layers. We trained using bfloat16 for a total of 3.3T tokens. The model is already chat-finetuned, and the chat template is as follows:

## 7.1 Technical Specifications

Architecture The Phi-3.5-Vision (4.2B parameters) is a multimodal model designed to process an image/multi-image and a textual prompt as inputs, and subsequently generate textual outputs. This model is composed of two primary components: an image encoder, i.e. , CLIP ViT-L/14 [RKH + 21] and a transformer decoder, i.e. , phi-3.5-mini. The visual tokens, once extracted by the image encoder, are then combined with text tokens in an interleaved way (no particular order for image and text tokens). To accommodate high-resolution images and various aspect ratios, a dynamic cropping strategy [DZZ + 24b] is utilized to split the input image into a 2d array of blocks, where the tokens of the blocks are concatenated to represent the whole image. For multi-image input, we simply concatenated tokens from each images together.

Pre-training The Phi-3.5-Vision model undergoes a pre-training phase using a diverse dataset, which consists of a combination of interleaved image-text documents ( e.g. , [LST + 24]), image-text pairs from FLD-5B [XWX + 24], synthetic data derived from Optical Character Recognition (OCR) of PDF files, datasets for chart/table comprehension, and text-only data. The objective of predicting the next token is employed specifically on text tokens, while any loss associated with image tokens is disregarded during this phase. The pre-training process involves a total of 0 . 5 T tokens that encompass both visual and text elements. During the pre-training phase, the maximum image resolution is capped at 1344 × 1344 as the majority of the training images are smaller than this resolution.

Post-training. The Phi-3.5-Vision model contains two post-training stages: supervised finetuning (SFT) and direct preference optimization (DPO). For SFT, we leveraged text SFT dataset, public multimodal instruct tuning datasets along with large-scale multimodal instruct tuning datasets that we built

Figure 6: Left: phi-3-mini 's completion without search. Right: phi-3-mini 's completion with search, using the default HuggingFace Chat-UI search ability. For reference, the 2026 Winter Olympic Games are scheduled to be held in Milano and Cortina in Italy, while the 2022 and 2018 Winter Olympic Games were held in Beijing, China and PyeongChang, Korea, respectively. Without the search results, the response is incorrect, while with the web search, not only does the response become accurate, but also gets more specific with suggestions.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7: The demo case shows Phi-3.5-Vision's capability in natural image understanding and reasoning.

<!-- image -->

ourselves, covering diverse domains and tasks such as general natural image understanding, chart/table/diagram understanding/reasoning, PowerPoint understanding, multi-image comparison, video summarization and model safety. The multimodal SFT data has about a total of 33B tokens. For DPO we mainly use a text DPO dataset and a relatively smaller-scale multimodal DPO dataset. For these two stages, we jointly train multimodal tasks and text-only tasks so that the model can achieve multi-modal reasoning while maintaining language capabilities as much as possible.

