## 1. Introduction

We present Gemini, a family of highly capable multimodal models developed at Google. We trained Gemini models jointly across image, audio, video, and text data for the purpose of building a model with both strong generalist capabilities across modalities alongside cutting-edge understanding and reasoning performance in each respective domain.

Gemini 1.0, our first version, comes in three sizes: Ultra for highly-complex tasks, Pro for enhanced performance and deployability at scale, and Nano for on-device applications. Each size is specifically tailored to address different computational limitations and application requirements.

After large-scale pre-training, we post-train our models to improve overall quality, enhance target capabilities, and ensure alignment and safety criteria are met. Due to the varied requirements of our downstream applications, we have produced two post-trained Gemini model family variants. Chat-focused variants, referred to as Gemini Apps models, are optimized for Gemini and Gemini Advanced, our conversational AI service formerly known as Bard. Developer-focused variants, referred to as Gemini API models, are optimized for a range of products and are accessible through Google AI Studio and Cloud Vertex AI.

We evaluate the performance of pre- and post-trained Gemini models on a comprehensive suite of internal and external benchmarks covering a wide range of language, coding, reasoning, and multimodal tasks.

The Gemini family advances state-of-the-art in large-scale language modeling (Anil et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Hoffmann et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023a; Radford et al., 2019; Rae et al., 2021), image understanding (Alayrac et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023b; Reed et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022a), audio processing (Radford et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023), and video understanding (Alayrac et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023). It also builds on the work on sequence models (Sutskever et al., 2014), a long history of work in deep learning based on neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015), and machine learning distributed systems

## 2. Model Architecture

Gemini models build on top of Transformer decoders (Vaswani et al., 2017b) that are enhanced with improvements in architecture and model optimization to enable stable training at scale and optimized inference on Google's Tensor Processing Units. They are trained to support 32k context length, employing efficient attention mechanisms (for e.g. multi-query attention (Shazeer, 2019a)). Our first version, Gemini 1.0, comprises three main sizes to support a wide range of applications as discussed in Table 1.

Gemini models are trained to accommodate textual input interleaved with a wide variety of audio and visual inputs, such as natural images, charts, screenshots, PDFs, and videos, and they can produce text and image outputs (see Figure 2). The visual encoding of Gemini models is inspired by our own foundational work on Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022), CoCa (Yu et al., 2022a), and PaLI (Chen et al., 2022), with the important distinction that the models are multimodal from the beginning and can natively output images using discrete image tokens (Ramesh et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022b).

Video understanding is accomplished by encoding the video as a sequence of frames in the large context window. Video frames or images can be interleaved naturally with text or audio as part of the model input. The models can handle variable input resolution in order to spend more compute on tasks that require fine-grained understanding. In addition, Gemini models can directly ingest audio

Table 1 | An overview of the Gemini 1.0 model family.

| Model size   | Model description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|--------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Ultra        | Our most capable model that delivers state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of highly complex tasks, including reasoning and multimodal tasks. It is efficiently serveable at scale on TPU accelerators due to the Gemini architecture.                                                                               |
| Pro          | A performance-optimized model in terms of cost as well as latency that delivers significant performance across a wide range of tasks. This model exhibits strong reasoning performance and broad multimodal capabilities.                                                                                                       |
| Nano         | Our most efficient model, designed to run on-device. We trained two versions of Nano, with 1.8B (Nano-1) and 3.25B (Nano-2) parameters, targeting low and high memory devices respectively. It is trained by distilling from larger Gemini models. It is 4-bit quantized for deployment and provides best-in-class performance. |

Figure 2 | Gemini models support interleaved sequences of text, image, audio, and video as inputs (illustrated by tokens of different colors in the input sequence). They can output responses with interleaved image and text.

<!-- image -->

signals at 16kHz from Universal Speech Model (USM) (Zhang et al., 2023) features. This enables the model to capture nuances that are typically lost when the audio is naively mapped to a text input (for example, see audio understanding demo on the website).

Training the Gemini family of models required innovations in training algorithms, dataset, and infrastructure. For the Pro model, the inherent scalability of our infrastructure and learning algorithms enable us to complete pre-training in a matter of weeks, leveraging a fraction of the Ultra's resources. The Nano series of models leverage additional advancements in distillation and training algorithms to produce the best-in-class small language models for a wide variety of tasks, such as summarization and reading comprehension, which power our next generation on-device experiences.

## 4. Pre-Training Dataset

Gemini models are trained on a dataset that is both multimodal and multilingual. Our pre-training dataset uses data from web documents, books, and code, and includes image, audio, and video data.

We use the SentencePiece tokenizer (Kudo and Richardson, 2018) and find that training the tokenizer on a large sample of the entire training corpus improves the inferred vocabulary and subsequently improves model performance. For example, we find Gemini models can efficiently

tokenize non-Latin scripts which can, in turn, benefit model quality as well as training and inference speed.

The number of tokens used to train the largest models were determined following the approach in Hoffmann et al. (2022). The smaller models are trained for significantly more tokens to improve performance for a given inference budget, similar to the approach advocated in Touvron et al. (2023a).

We apply quality filters to all datasets, using both heuristic rules and model-based classifiers. We also perform safety filtering to remove harmful content based on our policies. To maintain the integrity of evaluations, we search for and remove any evaluation data that may have been in our training corpus before using data for training. The final data mixtures and weights were determined through ablations on smaller models. We stage training to alter the mixture composition during training - increasing the weight of domain-relevant data towards the end of training. We find that data quality is an important factor for highly-performing models, and believe that many interesting questions remain around finding the optimal dataset distribution for pre-training.

## 7.4. Safety Evaluations

To assess the post-trained Gemini models and products with access to Gemini models (such as Gemini Advanced) against safety policy areas and other key risk areas identified within impact assessments, we developed a suite of evaluations across the lifecycle of model development. Some evaluations are

conducted at the model level (i.e. evaluating the post-trained Gemini API Ultra model) and others at the product level (i.e. evaluating Gemini Advanced, which gives access to 1.0 Ultra alongside other features like safety filters).

- · Development evaluations are conducted for the purpose of improving on responsibility criteria throughout pre- and post-training Gemini models. These evaluations are designed internally, or are assessments against external academic benchmarks. Evaluations consider issues such as helpfulness (instruction following and creativity), safety and factuality.
- · Assurance evaluations are conducted for the purpose of governance and review, usually at the end of key milestones or training runs by a group outside of the model development team. Assurance evaluations are standardized by modality and datasets are strictly held out. Only highlevel insights are fed back into the training process to assist with mitigation efforts. Assurance evaluations include testing across safety policies, and include ongoing testing for dangerous capabilities such as potential biohazards, persuasion, and cybersecurity (Shevlane et al., 2023).
- · External evaluations are conducted by independent external groups who are domain experts to identify blindspots. External groups stress-test our models across a range of issues, these areas are outlined in the 'External Evaluations' section below. The design of these evaluations is independent and results are reported periodically to the internal team and governance groups.
- · Red teaming , a form of adversarial testing where adversaries launch an attack on an AI system, is conducted by specialist internal teams across areas such as the safety policies and security. These activities include less structured processes involving sophisticated adversarial attacks to identify new vulnerabilities. Discovery of potential weaknesses can then be used to mitigate risks and improve evaluation approaches internally.

Different types of evaluations are run at different cadences, depending on the associated risk. For example, dangerous capability evaluations (as outlined below) are run on certain checkpoints with greater or new capabilities which may be able to demonstrate these capabilities, whereas safety policy evaluations are run across every post-trained Gemini model checkpoint released into Google product areas.

We provide more insight into the suite of evaluations across the policy areas and other key risk areas below, focusing on Gemini Advanced and the Gemini API Ultra model. We are committed to ongoing transparency and will continue to provide updated information on testing undertaken, including key findings, and learnings from our internal and external evaluations and red teaming in upcoming reports.

## 7.4.1. Development & Assurance Evaluations



## 7.4.4. External Evaluations



## 7.4.4.1 Gemini Ultra External Evaluations

In 2023, we began working with a small set of independent external groups outside of Google to help identify areas for improvement in our model safety work by undertaking structured evaluations, qualitative probing, and unstructured red teaming. External groups were selected based on their expertise across a range of domain areas, including those outlined within the White House Commitments, the U.S. Executive Order on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence, and the Bletchley Declaration:

- · Autonomous replication
- · Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) risks
- · Cyber-capabilities and cyber security
- · Societal risks, including:
- -Representational and distributional harms
- -Neutrality and Factuality
- -Robustness and information hazards.

Guidance was provided to each external group in relation to the scope of the testing, however, each group independently designed their testing methodology and prompt sets, and wrote their reports independently of Google. Internal Google experts were on-hand to provide input, where needed, based on their experience of testing Gemini models internally.

External groups were given black-box testing access to a December 2023 Gemini API Ultra model checkpoint over a number of weeks. Access enabled groups to undertake structured, batched evaluations via the Cloud Vertex AI API or interact with the model via a chat interface, depending on the type of testing being undertaken. These groups weren't given access to the pre-trained model, model weights, or queryable or direct external access to our pre-training data.

The models tested by external groups were production-ready fine-tuned versions, which had safety fine tuning and safety filters applied by default, and the ability to configure some sampling parameters, such as temperature, token limit, Top-k, and Top-p. Groups that did testing via the

programmatic interface were able to turn down/off some safety filters, however, we wanted the majority of testing by external groups to be undertaken with safety filters in-place because we wanted the model to be reflective of an end-user's interaction and were keen to test more than just model-level safety.

## 8. Discussion and Conclusion

We have presented Gemini, a new family of models that advance multimodal model capabilities in text, code, image, audio, and video. Our most capable pre-trained model Gemini Ultra, alongside the post-trained Gemini Apps and Gemini API variants, make significant advances across the board. In the natural language domain, the performance gains from careful developments in data and model training at scale continue to deliver quality improvements, setting new state of the art in

several benchmarks. In particular, Gemini Ultra surpasses human-expert performance on the exam benchmark MMLU, scoring 90.0%, which has been a defacto measure of progress for LLMs ever since it was first released in 2020. In the multimodal domain, Gemini Ultra sets new state of the art on most of the image understanding, video understanding, and audio understanding benchmarks without task-specific modifications or tuning.In particular, Gemini Ultra's multimodal reasoning capabilities are evident from its state-of-the-art performance on the recent MMMU benchmark (Yue et al., 2023), that comprises questions about images requiring college-level subject knowledge and deliberate reasoning.

Beyond the state-of-art results on benchmarks, what we are most excited about is the new use cases enabled by Gemini models. The new capabilities of Gemini models to parse complex images, such as charts or infographics, reason over interleaved sequences of images, audio, and text, and generate interleaved text and images as responses open a wide variety of new applications. As shown in figures throughout the report and appendix, Gemini models can enable new approaches in areas like education, everyday problem solving, multilingual communication, information summarization, extraction, and creativity. We expect that the users of these models will find all kinds of beneficial new uses that we have only scratched the surface of in our own investigations.

Despite their impressive capabilities, we should note that there are limitations to the use of LLMs. There is a continued need for ongoing research and development on 'hallucinations' generated by LLMs to ensure that model outputs are more reliable and verifiable. LLMs also struggle with tasks requiring high-level reasoning abilities like causal understanding, logical deduction, and counterfactual reasoning even though they achieve impressive performance on exam benchmarks. This underscores the need for more challenging and robust evaluations to measure their true understanding as the current state-of-the-art LLMs saturate many benchmarks.

The Gemini family is a further step towards our mission to solve intelligence, advance science and benefit humanity, and we are enthusiastic to see how these models are used by our colleagues at Google and beyond. We build on many innovations in machine learning, data, infrastructure, and responsible development - areas that we have been pursuing at Google for over a decade. The models we present in this report provide a strong foundation towards our broader future goal to develop a large-scale, modularized system that will have broad generalization capabilities across many modalities.

