## Abstract

We introduce Mixtral 8x7B, a Sparse Mixture of Experts (SMoE) language model. Mixtral has the same architecture as Mistral 7B, with the difference that each layer is composed of 8 feedforward blocks (i.e. experts). For every token, at each layer, a router network selects two experts to process the current state and combine their outputs. Even though each token only sees two experts, the selected experts can be different at each timestep. As a result, each token has access to 47B parameters, but only uses 13B active parameters during inference. Mixtral was trained with a context size of 32k tokens and it outperforms or matches Llama 2 70B and GPT-3.5 across all evaluated benchmarks. In particular, Mixtral vastly outperforms Llama 2 70B on mathematics, code generation, and multilingual benchmarks. We also provide a model finetuned to follow instructions, Mixtral 8x7B - Instruct, that surpasses GPT-3.5 Turbo, Claude-2.1, Gemini Pro, and Llama 2 70B - chat model on human benchmarks. Both the base and instruct models are released under the Apache 2.0 license.

Code: https://github.com/mistralai/mistral-src Webpage: https://mistral.ai/news/mixtral-of-experts/

## 1 Introduction

In this paper, we present Mixtral 8x7B, a sparse mixture of experts model (SMoE) with open weights, licensed under Apache 2.0. Mixtral outperforms Llama 2 70B and GPT-3.5 on most benchmarks. As it only uses a subset of its parameters for every token, Mixtral allows faster inference speed at low batch-sizes, and higher throughput at large batch-sizes.

Mixtral is a sparse mixture-of-experts network. It is a decoder-only model where the feedforward block picks from a set of 8 distinct groups of parameters. At every layer, for every token, a router network chooses two of these groups (the 'experts') to process the token and combine their output additively. This technique increases the number of parameters of a model while controlling cost and latency, as the model only uses a fraction of the total set of parameters per token.

Mixtral is pretrained with multilingual data using a context size of 32k tokens. It either matches or exceeds the performance of Llama 2 70B and GPT-3.5, over several benchmarks. In particular,

Figure 1: Mixture of Experts Layer. Each input vector is assigned to 2 of the 8 experts by a router. The layer's output is the weighted sum of the outputs of the two selected experts. In Mixtral, an expert is a standard feedforward block as in a vanilla transformer architecture.

<!-- image -->

Mixtral demonstrates superior capabilities in mathematics, code generation, and tasks that require multilingual understanding, significantly outperforming Llama 2 70B in these domains. Experiments show that Mixtral is able to successfully retrieve information from its context window of 32k tokens, regardless of the sequence length and the location of the information in the sequence.

We also present Mixtral 8x7B - Instruct, a chat model fine-tuned to follow instructions using supervised fine-tuning and Direct Preference Optimization [25]. Its performance notably surpasses that of GPT-3.5 Turbo, Claude-2.1, Gemini Pro, and Llama 2 70B - chat model on human evaluation benchmarks. Mixtral - Instruct also demonstrates reduced biases, and a more balanced sentiment profile in benchmarks such as BBQ, and BOLD.

We release both Mixtral 8x7B and Mixtral 8x7B - Instruct under the Apache 2.0 license 1 , free for academic and commercial usage, ensuring broad accessibility and potential for diverse applications. To enable the community to run Mixtral with a fully open-source stack, we submitted changes to the vLLM project, which integrates Megablocks CUDA kernels for efficient inference. Skypilot also allows the deployment of vLLM endpoints on any instance in the cloud.

## 2 Architectural details

Mixtral is based on a transformer architecture [31] and uses the same modifications as described in [18], with the notable exceptions that Mixtral supports a fully dense context length of 32k tokens, and the feedforward blocks are replaced by Mixture-of-Expert layers (Section 2.1). The model architecture parameters are summarized in Table 1.

## 5 Routing analysis

In this section, we perform a small analysis on the expert selection by the router. In particular, we are interested to see if during training some experts specialized to some specific domains (e.g. mathematics, biology, philosophy, etc.).

To investigate this, we measure the distribution of selected experts on different subsets of The Pile validation dataset [14]. Results are presented in Figure 7, for layers 0, 15, and 31 (layers 0 and 31 respectively being the first and the last layers of the model). Surprisingly, we do not observe obvious patterns in the assignment of experts based on the topic. For instance, at all layers, the distribution of expert assignment is very similar for ArXiv papers (written in Latex), for biology (PubMed Abstracts), and for Philosophy (PhilPapers) documents.

Only for DM Mathematics we note a marginally different distribution of experts. This divergence is likely a consequence of the dataset's synthetic nature and its limited coverage of the natural language spectrum, and is particularly noticeable at the first and last layers, where the hidden states are very correlated to the input and output embeddings respectively.

This suggests that the router does exhibit some structured syntactic behavior. Figure 8 shows examples of text from different domains (Python code, mathematics, and English), where each token is highlighted with a background color corresponding to its selected expert. The figure shows that words such as 'self' in Python and 'Question' in English often get routed through the same expert even though they involve multiple tokens. Similarly, in code, the indentation tokens are always assigned to the same experts, particularly at the first and last layers where the hidden states are more correlated to the input and output of the model.

We also note from Figure 8 that consecutive tokens are often assigned the same experts. In fact, we observe some degree of positional locality in The Pile datasets. Table 5 shows the proportion of consecutive tokens that get the same expert assignments per domain and layer. The proportion of repeated

Figure 7: Proportion of tokens assigned to each expert on different domains from The Pile dataset for layers 0, 15, and 31. The gray dashed vertical line marks 1 / 8 , i.e. the proportion expected with uniform sampling. Here, we consider experts that are either selected as a first or second choice by the router. A breakdown of the proportion of assignments done in each case cane be seen in Figure 9 in the Appendix.

<!-- image -->

Table 5: Percentage of expert assignment repetitions. We evaluate the proportion of times the same expert is assigned to a token i and its following token i +1 . We report whether the first chosen expert is the same, or whether the same expert is observed as first or second choice in consecutive tokens. For reference, the expected proportion of repetitions in the case of random assignments is 1 8 = 12 . 5% for 'First choice' and 1 -6 8 5 7 ≈ 46% for 'First and second choice'. Repetitions at the first layer are close to random, but are significantly higher at layers 15 and 31. The high number of repetitions shows that expert choice exhibits high temporal locality at these layers.

|                  | First choice   | First choice   | First choice   | First or second choice   | First or second choice   | First or second choice   |
|------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
|                  | Layer 0        | Layer 15       | Layer 31       | Layer 0                  | Layer 15                 | Layer 31                 |
| ArXiv            | 14.0%          | 27.9%          | 22.7%          | 46.5%                    | 62.3%                    | 52.9%                    |
| DMMathematics    | 14.1%          | 28.4%          | 19.7%          | 44.9%                    | 67.0%                    | 44.5%                    |
| Github           | 14.9%          | 28.1%          | 19.7%          | 49.9%                    | 66.9%                    | 49.2%                    |
| Gutenberg        | 13.9%          | 26.1%          | 26.3%          | 49.5%                    | 63.1%                    | 52.2%                    |
| PhilPapers       | 13.6%          | 25.3%          | 22.1%          | 46.9%                    | 61.9%                    | 51.3%                    |
| PubMed Abstracts | 14.2%          | 24.6%          | 22.0%          | 48.6%                    | 61.6%                    | 51.8%                    |
| StackExchange    | 13.6%          | 27.2%          | 23.6%          | 48.2%                    | 64.6%                    | 53.6%                    |
| Wikipedia (en)   | 14.4%          | 23.6%          | 25.3%          | 49.8%                    | 62.1%                    | 51.8%                    |

consecutive assignments is significantly higher than random for higher layers. This has implications in how one might optimize the model for fast training and inference. For example, cases with high locality are more likely to cause over-subscription of certain experts when doing Expert Parallelism. Conversely, this locality can be leveraged for caching, as is done in [11]. A more complete view of these same expert frequency is provided for all layers and across datasets in Figure 10 in the Appendix.

## 6 Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced Mixtral 8x7B, the first mixture-of-experts network to reach a state-of-theart performance among open-source models. Mixtral 8x7B Instruct outperforms Claude-2.1, Gemini Pro, and GPT-3.5 Turbo on human evaluation benchmarks. Because it only uses two experts at each time step, Mixtral only uses 13B active parameters per token while outperforming the previous best model using 70B parameters per token (Llama 2 70B). We are making our trained and fine-tuned models publicly available under the Apache 2.0 license. By sharing our models, we aim to facilitate the development of new techniques and applications that can benefit a wide range of industries and domains.

Figure 8: Text samples where each token is colored with the first expert choice. The selection of experts appears to be more aligned with the syntax rather than the domain, especially at the initial and final layers.

<!-- image -->

