## Abstract

High throughput serving of large language models (LLMs) requires batching su/fficiently many requests at a time. However, existing systems struggle because the key-value cache (KV cache) memory for each request is huge and grows and shrinks dynamically. When managed ine/fficiently, this memory can be signi/ficantly wasted by fragmentation and redundant duplication, limiting the batch size. To address this problem, we propose PagedAttention, an attention algorithm inspired by the classical virtual memory and paging techniques in operating systems. On top of it, we build vLLM, an LLM serving system that achieves (1) near-zero waste in KV cache memory and (2) /flexible sharing of KV cache within and across requests to further reduce memory usage. Our evaluations show that vLLM improves the throughput of popular LLMs by 2-4  with the same level of latency compared to the state-of-the-art systems, such as FasterTransformer and Orca. The improvement is more pronounced with longer sequences, larger models, and more complex decoding algorithms. vLLM's source code is publicly available at h/t\_tps://github.com/vllm-project/vllm .

## 1 Introduction

The emergence of large language models ( LLMs ) like GPT [5, 37] and PaLM [9] have enabled new applications such as programming assistants [6, 18] and universal chatbots [19, 35] that are starting to profoundly impact our work and daily routines. Many cloud companies [34, 44] are racing to provide these applications as hosted services. However, running these applications is very expensive, requiring a large number of hardware accelerators such as GPUs. According to recent estimates, processing an LLM request can be 10  more expensive than a traditional keyword query [43]. Given these high costs, increasing the throughput-and hence reducing

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for pro/fit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the /first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

SOSP '23, October 23-26, 2023, Koblenz, Germany

© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0229-7/23/10. h/t\_tps://doi.org/10.1145/3600006.3613165

Figure 1. Left: Memory layout when serving an LLM with 13B parameters on NVIDIA A100. The parameters (gray) persist in GPU memory throughout serving. The memory for the KV cache (red) is (de)allocated per serving request. A small amount of memory (yellow) is used ephemerally for activation. Right: vLLM smooths out the rapid growth curve of KV cache memory seen in existing systems [31, 60], leading to a notable boost in serving throughput.

<!-- image -->

Parameters

(26GB, 65%)

KV

Cache

(>30%)

Others

NVIDIA A100 40GB

the cost per request-of LLM serving systems is becoming more important.

At the core of LLMs lies an autoregressive Transformer model [53]. This model generates words (tokens), one at a time , based on the input (prompt) and the previous sequence of the output's tokens it has generated so far. For each request, this expensive process is repeated until the model outputs a termination token. This sequential generation process makes the workload memory-bound , underutilizing the computation power of GPUs and limiting the serving throughput.

Improving the throughput is possible by batching multiple requests together. However, to process many requests in a batch, the memory space for each request should be e/fficiently managed. For example, Fig. 1 (left) illustrates the memorydistribution for a 13B-parameter LLM on an NVIDIA A100 GPU with 40GB RAM. Approximately 65% of the memory is allocated for the model weights, which remain static during serving. Close to 30% of the memory is used to store the dynamic states of the requests. For Transformers, these states consist of the key and value tensors associated with the attention mechanism, commonly referred to as KVcache [41], which represent the context from earlier tokens to generate new output tokens in sequence. The remaining small

Figure 2. Average percentage of memory wastes in di/fferent LLM serving systems during the experiment in §6.2.

<!-- image -->

percentage of memory is used for other data, including activations - the ephemeral tensors created when evaluating the LLM. Since the model weights are constant and the activations only occupy a small fraction of the GPU memory, the way the KV cache is managed is critical in determining the maximum batch size. When managed ine/fficiently, the KV cache memory can signi/ficantly limit the batch size and consequently the throughput of the LLM, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (right).

In this paper, we observe that existing LLM serving systems [31, 60] fall short of managing the KV cache memory e/fficiently. This is mainly because they store the KV cache of a request in contiguous memory space, as most deep learning frameworks [33, 39] require tensors to be stored in contiguous memory. However, unlike the tensors in the traditional deep learning workloads, the KV cache has unique characteristics: it dynamically grows and shrinks over time as the model generates new tokens, and its lifetime and length are not known a priori. These characteristics make the existing systems' approach signi/ficantly ine/fficient in two ways:

First, the existing systems [31, 60] su/ffer from internal and external memory fragmentation. To store the KV cache of a request in contiguous space, they pre-allocate a contiguous chunk of memory with the request's maximum length (e.g., 2048 tokens). This can result in severe internal fragmentation, since the request's actual length can be much shorter than its maximum length (e.g., Fig. 11). Moreover, even if the actual length is known a priori, the pre-allocation is still ine/fficient: As the entire chunk is reserved during the request's lifetime, other shorter requests cannot utilize any part of the chunk that is currently unused. Besides, external memory fragmentation can also be signi/ficant, since the preallocated size can be di/fferent for each request. Indeed, our pro/filing results in Fig. 2 show that only 20.4% - 38.2% of the KV cache memory is used to store the actual token states in the existing systems.

Second, the existing systems cannot exploit the opportunities for memory sharing. LLM services often use advanced

decoding algorithms, such as parallel sampling and beam search, that generate multiple outputs per request. In these scenarios, the request consists of multiple sequences that can partially share their KV cache. However, memory sharing is not possible in the existing systems because the KV cache of the sequences is stored in separate contiguous spaces.

To address the above limitations, we propose PagedAttention , an attention algorithm inspired by the operating system's (OS) solution to memory fragmentation and sharing: virtual memory with paging . PagedAttention divides the request's KV cache into blocks, each of which can contain the attention keys and values of a /fixed number of tokens. In PagedAttention, the blocks for the KV cache are not necessarily stored in contiguous space. Therefore, we can manage the KV cache in a more /flexible way as in OS's virtual memory: one can think of blocks as pages, tokens as bytes, and requests as processes. This design alleviates internal fragmentation by using relatively small blocks and allocating them on demand. Moreover, it eliminates external fragmentation as all blocks have the same size. Finally, it enables memory sharing at the granularity of a block, across the di/fferent sequences associated with the same request or even across the di/fferent requests.

In this work, we build vLLM , a high-throughput distributed LLM serving engine on top of PagedAttention that achieves near-zero waste in KV cache memory. vLLM uses block-level memory management and preemptive request scheduling that are co-designed with PagedAttention. vLLM supports popular LLMs such as GPT [5], OPT [62], and LLaMA [52] with varying sizes, including the ones exceeding the memory capacity of a single GPU. Our evaluations on various models and workloads show that vLLM improves the LLM serving throughput by 2-4  compared to the state-of-the-art systems [31, 60], without a/ffecting the model accuracy at all. The improvements are more pronounced with longer sequences, larger models, and more complex decoding algorithms (§4.3). In summary, we make the following contributions:

- · Weidentify the challenges in memory allocation in serving LLMs and quantify their impact on serving performance.
- · We propose PagedAttention, an attention algorithm that operates on KV cache stored in non-contiguous paged memory, which is inspired by the virtual memory and paging in OS.
- · Wedesign and implement vLLM, a distributed LLM serving engine built on top of PagedAttention.
- · We evaluate vLLM on various scenarios and demonstrate that it substantially outperforms the previous state-of-theart solutions such as FasterTransformer [31] and Orca [60].

## 2 Background

In this section, we describe the generation and serving procedures of typical LLMs and the iteration-level scheduling used in LLM serving.

## 4 Method

In this work, we develop a new attention algorithm, PagedAttention , and build an LLM serving engine, vLLM , to tackle the challenges outlined in §3. The architecture of vLLM is shown in Fig. 4. vLLM adopts a centralized scheduler to coordinate the execution of distributed GPU workers. The KV cache manager e/ffectively manages the KV cache in a paged fashion, enabled by PagedAttention. Speci/fically, the KV cache manager manages the physical KV cache memory on the GPU workers through the instructions sent by the centralized scheduler.

Next, We describe the PagedAttention algorithm in §4.1. With that, we show the design of the KV cache manager in §4.2 and how it facilitates PagedAttention in §4.3, respectively. Then, we show how this design facilitates e/ffective memory management for various decoding methods (§4.4) and handles the variable length input and output sequences (§4.5). Finally, we show how the system design of vLLM works in a distributed setting (§4.6).

## 6.1 Experimental Setup

Model and server con/figurations. We use OPT [62] models with 13B, 66B, and 175B parameters and LLaMA [52] with 13B parameters for our evaluation. 13B and 66B are popular sizes for LLMs as shown in an LLM leaderboard [38], while 175B is the size of the famous GPT-3 [5] model. For all of our experiments, we use A2 instances with NVIDIA A100 GPUs on Google Cloud Platform. The detailed model sizes and server con/figurations are shown in Table 1.

Workloads. Wesynthesize workloads based on ShareGPT [51] and Alpaca [50] datasets, which contain input and output texts of real LLM services. The ShareGPT dataset is a collection of user-shared conversations with ChatGPT [35]. The Alpaca dataset is an instruction dataset generated by GPT3.5 with self-instruct [57]. We tokenize the datasets and use their input and output lengths to synthesize client requests. As shown in Fig. 11, the ShareGPT dataset has 8.4  longer input prompts and 5.8  longer outputs on average than the Alpaca dataset, with higher variance. Since these datasets do not include timestamps, we generate request arrival times using Poisson distribution with di/fferent request rates.

Baseline 1: FasterTransformer. FasterTransformer [31] is a distributed inference engine highly optimized for latency.

As FasterTransformer does not have its own scheduler, we implement a custom scheduler with a dynamic batching mechanism similar to the existing serving systems such as Triton [30]. Speci/fically, we set a maximum batch size  as large as possible for each experiment, according to the GPU memory capacity. The scheduler takes up to  number of earliest arrived requests and sends the batch to FasterTransformer for processing.

Baseline 2: Orca. Orca [60] is a state-of-the-art LLM serving system optimized for throughput. Since Orca is not publicly available for use, we implement our own version of Orca. We assume Orca uses the buddy allocation algorithm to determine the memory address to store KV cache. We implement three versions of Orca based on how much it over-reserves the space for request outputs:

- · Orca (Oracle). We assume the system has the knowledge of the lengths of the outputs that will be actually generated for the requests. This shows the upper-bound performance of Orca, which is infeasible to achieve in practice.
- · Orca (Pow2). We assume the system over-reserves the space for outputs by at most 2  . For example, if the true output length is 25, it reserves 32 positions for outputs.
- · Orca (Max). We assume the system always reserves the space up to the maximum sequence length of the model, i.e., 2048 tokens.

Key metrics. We focus on serving throughput. Speci/fically, using the workloads with di/fferent request rates, we measure normalized latency of the systems, the mean of every request's end-to-end latency divided by its output length, as in Orca [60]. A high-throughput serving system should retain low normalized latency against high request rates. For most experiments, we evaluate the systems with 1-hour traces. As an exception, we use 15-minute traces for the OPT-175B model due to the cost limit.

Orca (Max)

Orca (Pow2)

Orca (Oracle)

Fig. 15 plots the amount of memory saving, computed by the number of blocks we saved by sharing divided by the number of total blocks without sharing. We show 6.1% - 9.8% memory saving on parallel sampling and 37.6% - 55.2% on beam search. In the same experiments with the ShareGPT dataset, we saw 16.2% - 30.5% memory saving on parallel sampling and 44.3% - 66.3% on beam search.

<!-- image -->

(b) parallel generation (parallel size = 4)

<!-- image -->

(e) beam search (beam width = 4)

<!-- image -->

(a) parallel generation (parallel size = 2)

<!-- image -->

(c) parallel generation (parallel size = 6)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

(f) beam search (beam width = 6)

Figure 14. Parallel generation and beam search with OPT-13B on the Alpaca dataset.

## 7 Ablation Studies

In this section, we study various aspects of vLLM and evaluate the design choices we make with ablation experiments.

## 8 Discussion

Applying the virtual memory and paging technique to other GPU workloads. The idea of virtual memory and paging is e/ffective for managing the KV cache in LLM serving because the workload requires dynamic memory allocation (since the output length is not known a priori) and its performance is bound by the GPU memory capacity. However, this does not generally hold for every GPU workload. For example, in DNN training, the tensor shapes are typically static, and thus memory allocation can be optimized ahead of time. For another example, in serving DNNs that are not LLMs, an increase in memory e/fficiency may not result in any performance improvement since the performance is primarily compute-bound. In such scenarios, introducing the vLLM's techniques may rather degrade the performance due to the extra overhead of memory indirection and non-contiguous block memory. However, we would be excited to see vLLM's techniques being applied to other workloads with similar properties to LLM serving.

LLM-speci/fic optimizations in applying virtual memory and paging. vLLM re-interprets and augments the idea of virtual memory and paging by leveraging the applicationspeci/fic semantics. One example is vLLM's all-or-nothing

swap-out policy, which exploits the fact that processing a request requires all of its corresponding token states to be stored in GPU memory. Another example is the recomputation method to recover the evicted blocks, which is not feasible in OS. Besides, vLLM mitigates the overhead of memory indirection in paging by fusing the GPU kernels for memory access operations with those for other operations such as attention.

## 10 Conclusion

This paper proposes PagedAttention, a new attention algorithm that allows attention keys and values to be stored in non-contiguous paged memory, and presents vLLM, a high-throughput LLM serving system with e/fficient memory management enabled by PagedAttention. Inspired by operating systems, we demonstrate how established techniques, such as virtual memory and copy-on-write, can be adapted to e/fficiently manage KV cache and handle various decoding algorithms in LLM serving. Our experiments show that vLLM achieves 2-4  throughput improvements over the state-of-the-art systems.

