## 1. Introduction

We present Gemini, a family of highly capable multimodal models developed at Google. We trained Gemini models jointly across image, audio, video, and text data for the purpose of building a model with both strong generalist capabilities across modalities alongside cutting-edge understanding and reasoning performance in each respective domain.

Gemini 1.0, our first version, comes in three sizes: Ultra for highly-complex tasks, Pro for enhanced performance and deployability at scale, and Nano for on-device applications. Each size is specifically tailored to address different computational limitations and application requirements.

After large-scale pre-training, we post-train our models to improve overall quality, enhance target capabilities, and ensure alignment and safety criteria are met. Due to the varied requirements of our downstream applications, we have produced two post-trained Gemini model family variants.

Chat-focused variants, referred to as Gemini Apps models, are optimized for Gemini and Gemini Advanced, our conversational AI service formerly known as Bard. Developer-focused variants, referred to as Gemini API models, are optimized for a range of products and are accessible through Google AI
Studio and Cloud Vertex AI.

We evaluate the performance of pre- and post-trained Gemini models on a comprehensive suite of internal and external benchmarks covering a wide range of language, coding, reasoning, and multimodal tasks.

The Gemini family advances state-of-the-art in large-scale language modeling (Anil et al., 2023;
Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Hoffmann et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023a; Radford et al.,
2019; Rae et al., 2021), image understanding (Alayrac et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023b; Reed et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022a), audio processing (Radford et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2023), and video understanding (Alayrac et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023). It also builds on the work on sequence models (Sutskever et al., 2014), a long history of work in deep learning based on neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015), and machine learning distributed systems
(Barham et al., 2022; Bradbury et al., 2018; Dean et al., 2012) that enable large-scale training.

Our most capable model, Gemini Ultra, achieves new state-of-the-art results in 30 of 32 benchmarks we report on, including 10 of 12 popular text and reasoning benchmarks, 9 of 9 image understanding benchmarks, 6 of 6 video understanding benchmarks, and 5 of 5 speech recognition and speech translation benchmarks. Gemini Ultra is the first model to achieve human-expert performance on MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021a) - a prominent benchmark testing knowledge and reasoning via a suite of exams - with a score above 90%. Beyond text, Gemini Ultra makes notable advances on challenging multimodal reasoning tasks. For example, on the recent MMMU benchmark (Yue et al.,
2023), that comprises questions about images on multi-discipline tasks requiring college-level subject knowledge and deliberate reasoning, Gemini Ultra achieves a new state-of-the-art score of 62.4%, outperforming the previous best model by more than 5 percentage points. It provides a uniform performance lift for video question answering and audio understanding benchmarks.

Qualitative evaluation showcases impressive crossmodal reasoning capabilities, enabling the model to understand and reason across an input sequence of audio, images, and text natively (see Figure 5
and Table 13). Consider the educational setting depicted in Figure 1 as an example. A teacher has drawn a physics problem of a skier going down a slope, and a student has worked through a solution to it. Using Gemini models' multimodal reasoning capabilities, the model is able to understand the messy handwriting, correctly understand the problem formulation, convert both the problem and solution to mathematical typesetting, identify the specific step of reasoning where the student went wrong in solving the problem, and then give a worked through correct solution to the problem. This opens up exciting educational possibilities, and we believe the new multimodal and reasoning capabilities of Gemini models have dramatic applications across many fields.

The reasoning capabilities of large language models show promise toward building generalist agents that can tackle more complex multi-step problems. The AlphaCode team built AlphaCode
2 (Leblond et al, 2023), a new Gemini-model-powered agent, that combines Gemini models' reasoning capabilities with search and tool-use to excel at solving competitive programming problems.

AlphaCode 2 ranks within the top 15% of entrants on the Codeforces competitive programming platform, a large improvement over its state-of-the-art predecessor in the top 50% (Li et al., 2022).

In tandem, we advance the frontier of efficiency with Gemini Nano, a series of small models targeting on-device deployment. These models excel in on-device tasks, such as summarization, reading comprehension, text completion tasks, and exhibit impressive capabilities in reasoning, STEM, coding, multimodal, and multilingual tasks relative to their sizes.

In the following sections, we first provide an overview of the model architecture, training infrastructure, and pre-training dataset. We then present detailed *evaluations* of the pre- and post-trained Gemini model family, covering well-studied benchmarks across text, code, image, audio and video —
which include both English performance and multilingual capabilities. Next we discuss our approach to post-training, highlight common and distinct aspects of the Gemini Apps and Gemini API model variants, and benchmark their performance on key capabilities. *Responsible deployment* is critical: we explain our process for impact assessments, developing model policies, evaluations, and mitigations of harm before deployment decisions. Finally, we discuss the broader implications of Gemini models, their limitations alongside their potential applications - paving the way for a new era of research and innovation in AI.

Figure 1 | Verifying a student's solution to a physics problem. The model is able to correctly recognize all of the handwritten content and verify the reasoning. On top of understanding the text in the image, it needs to understand the problem setup and correctly follow instructions to generate LATEX.

## 8. Discussion And Conclusion

We have presented Gemini, a new family of models that advance multimodal model capabilities in text, code, image, audio, and video. Our most capable pre-trained model Gemini Ultra, alongside the post-trained Gemini Apps and Gemini API variants, make significant advances across the board.

In the natural language domain, the performance gains from careful developments in data and model training at scale continue to deliver quality improvements, setting new state of the art in several benchmarks. In particular, Gemini Ultra surpasses human-expert performance on the exam benchmark MMLU, scoring 90.0%, which has been a defacto measure of progress for LLMs ever since it was first released in 2020. In the multimodal domain, Gemini Ultra sets new state of the art on most of the image understanding, video understanding, and audio understanding benchmarks without task-specific modifications or tuning.In particular, Gemini Ultra's multimodal reasoning capabilities are evident from its state-of-the-art performance on the recent MMMU benchmark (Yue et al., 2023), that comprises questions about images requiring college-level subject knowledge and deliberate reasoning.

Beyond the state-of-art results on benchmarks, what we are most excited about is the new use cases enabled by Gemini models. The new capabilities of Gemini models to parse complex images, such as charts or infographics, reason over interleaved sequences of images, audio, and text, and generate interleaved text and images as responses open a wide variety of new applications. As shown in figures throughout the report and appendix, Gemini models can enable new approaches in areas like education, everyday problem solving, multilingual communication, information summarization, extraction, and creativity. We expect that the users of these models will find all kinds of beneficial new uses that we have only scratched the surface of in our own investigations.

Despite their impressive capabilities, we should note that there are limitations to the use of LLMs.

There is a continued need for ongoing research and development on "hallucinations" generated by LLMs to ensure that model outputs are more reliable and verifiable. LLMs also struggle with tasks requiring high-level reasoning abilities like causal understanding, logical deduction, and counterfactual reasoning even though they achieve impressive performance on exam benchmarks. This underscores the need for more challenging and robust evaluations to measure their true understanding as the current state-of-the-art LLMs saturate many benchmarks.

The Gemini family is a further step towards our mission to solve intelligence, advance science and benefit humanity, and we are enthusiastic to see how these models are used by our colleagues at Google and beyond. We build on many innovations in machine learning, data, infrastructure, and responsible development - areas that we have been pursuing at Google for over a decade. The models we present in this report provide a strong foundation towards our broader future goal to develop a large-scale, modularized system that will have broad generalization capabilities across many modalities.

## Data Overview

Training Dataset
Gemini models are trained on a dataset that is both multimodal
and multilingual. Our pre-training dataset uses data from web
documents, books, and code, and includes image, audio, and
video data.

Refer to Section 4 (Pre-Training Dataset) for further details.

Evaluation Dataset
We compare pre- and post-trained Gemini Ultra models to a suite of external LLMs and our previous best model PaLM 2 across a series of text-based academic benchmarks covering
reasoning, reading comprehension, STEM, and coding.

We also evaluate Gemini models on four different multimodal capabilities:
high-level object recognition using captioning or question-answering tasks such as VQAv2; finegrained transcription using tasks such as TextVQA and DocVQA
requiring the model to recognize low-level details; chart understanding requiring spatial understanding of input layout using ChartQA and InfographicVQA tasks; and multimodal reasoning using tasks such as Ai2D, MathVista and MMMU.

| Refer to Section                                                  |    5 |  (Evaluation) for further details.   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|------|--------------------------------------|
| Post-training Dataset                                             |      |                                      |
| For post-training, we first collect a diverse set of prompts that |      |                                      |
| are representative of real-world use cases. We then collect       |      |                                      |
| demonstration data of what the model's output should be for       |      |                                      |
| a given prompt for supervised fine-tuning. We further collect     |      |                                      |
| different possible responses to a given prompt, and collect       |      |                                      |
| feedback data over these to train reward models.                  |      |                                      |
| Refer to Section                                                  |  6.3 | (Post-Training Methods and Data)     |
| for further details.                                              |      |                                      |
| Evaluation Results                                                |      |                                      |
| Benchmark Information                                             |      |                                      |
| See Section                                                       |  5   | (Evaluation).                        |
| Evaluation Results                                                |      |                                      |
| See Section                                                       |  5   | (Evaluation) and Section             |
| man Evaluation).                                                  |      |                                      |

