## Introduction

We present Gemma, a family of open models based on Google's Gemini models (Gemini Team,
2023).

We trained Gemma models on up to 6T tokens of text, using architectures, data, and training recipes inspired by the Gemini model family. Like Gemini, these models achieve strong generalist capabilities in text domains, alongside state-of-theart understanding and reasoning skills at scale.

With this work, we release both pre-trained and fine-tuned checkpoints, as well as an open-source codebase for inference and serving.

Gemma comes in two sizes: a 7 billion parameter model for efficient deployment and development on GPU and TPU, and a 2 billion parameter model for CPU and on-device applications. Each size is designed to address different computational constraints, applications, and developer requirements. At each scale, we release raw, pretrained checkpoints, as well as checkpoints finetuned for dialogue, instruction-following, helpfulness, and safety. We thoroughly evaluate the shortcomings of our models on a suite of quantitative and qualitative benchmarks. We believe the release of both pretrained and fine-tuned checkpoints will enable thorough research and investigation into the impact of current instructiontuning regimes, as well as the development of increasingly safe and responsible model development methodologies.

Gemma advances state-of-the-art performance relative to comparable-scale (and some larger), open models (Almazrouei et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a,b) across a wide range of domains including both automated benchmarks and human evaluation. Example domains include question answering (Clark et al.,
2019; Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), commonsense reasoning (Sakaguchi et al., 2019; Suzgun et al.,
2022), mathematics and science (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2020), and coding (Austin et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021). See complete details in the Evaluation section.

Like Gemini, Gemma builds on recent work on sequence models (Sutskever et al., 2014) and transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), deep learning methods based on neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015), and techniques for large-scale training on distributed systems (Barham et al., 2022; Dean et al., 2012; Roberts et al., 2023). Gemma also builds on Google's long history of open models and ecosystems, including Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013), the Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017), BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), and T5 (Raffel et al., 2019) and T5X (Roberts et al., 2022).

We believe the responsible release of LLMs is critical for improving the safety of frontier models, for ensuring equitable access to this breakthrough technology, for enabling rigorous evaluation and analysis of current techniques, and for enabling the development of the next wave of innovations.

While thorough testing of all Gemma models has been conducted, testing cannot cover all applications and scenarios in which Gemma may be used. With this in mind, all Gemma users should conduct rigorous safety testing specific to their use case before deployment or use. More details on our approach to safety can be found in section Responsible Deployment.

In this technical report, we provide a detailed overview of the model architecture, training infrastructure, and pretraining and fine-tuning recipes for Gemma, followed by thorough evaluations of all checkpoints across a wide-variety of quantitative and qualitative benchmarks, as well as both standard academic benchmarks and human-preference evaluations. We then discuss in detail our approach to safe and responsible deployment. Finally, we outline the broader implications of Gemma, its limitations and advantages.

## Discussion And Conclusion

We present Gemma, an openly available family of generative language models for text and code.

Gemma advances the state of the art of openly available language model performance, safety, and responsible development.

In particular, we are confident that Gemma models will provide a net benefit to the community given our extensive safety evaluations and mitigations; however, we acknowledge that this release is irreversible and the harms resulting from open models are not yet well defined, so we continue to adopt assessments and safety mitigations proportionate to the potential risks of these models. In addition, our models outperform competitors on 6 standard safety benchmarks, and in human side-by-side evaluations.

Gemma models improve performance on a broad range of domains including dialogue, reasoning, mathematics, and code generation. Results on MMLU (64.3%) and MBPP (44.4%) demonstrate both the high performance of Gemma, as well as the continued headroom in openly available LLM performance.

Beyond state-of-the-art performance measures on benchmark tasks, we are excited to see what new use-cases arise from the community, and what new capabilities emerge as we advance the field together.

We hope that researchers use Gemma to accelerate a broad array of research, and that developers create beneficial new applications, user experiences, and other functionality.

Gemma benefits from many learnings of the Gemini model program including code, data, architecture, instruction tuning, reinforcement learning from human feedback, and evaluations.

As discussed in the Gemini technical report, we reiterate a non-exhaustive set of limitations to the use of LLMs. Even with great performance on benchmark tasks, further research is needed to create robust, safe models that reliably perform as intended. Example further research areas include factuality, alignment, complex reasoning, and robustness to adversarial input. As discussed by Gemini, we note the need for more challenging and robust benchmarks.

