# Abstract

AutoGen2 is an open-source framework that allows developers to build LLM ap-
plications via multiple agents that can converse with each other to accomplish
tasks. AutoGen agents are customizable, conversable, and can operate in vari-
ous modes that employ combinations of LLMs, human inputs, and tools. Using
AutoGen, developers can also flexibly define agent interaction behaviors. Both
natural language and computer code can be used to program flexible conversation
patterns for different applications. AutoGen serves as a generic framework for
building diverse applications of various complexities and LLM capacities. Em-
pirical studies demonstrate the effectiveness of the framework in many example
applications, with domains ranging from mathematics, coding, question answer-
ing, operations research, online decision-making, entertainment, etc.

1Corresponding author. Email: auto-gen@outlook.com
2https://github.com/microsoft/autogen

Agent CustomizationConversable agentFlexible Conversation Patterns…………………Hierarchical chatJoint chatMulti-Agent Conversations…Execute the following code…Got it! Here is the revised code …No, please plot % change!Plot a chart of META and TESLA stock price change YTD.Output:$MonthOutput:%MonthError package yfinanceis not installedSorry! Please first pip install yfinanceand then execute the codeInstalling…Example Agent Chat

1

# Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are becoming a crucial building block in developing powerful agents
that utilize LLMs for reasoning, tool usage, and adapting to new observations (Yao et al., 2022; Xi
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b) in many real-world tasks. Given the expanding tasks that could
benefit from LLMs and the growing task complexity, an intuitive approach to scale up the power of
agents is to use multiple agents that cooperate. Prior work suggests that multiple agents can help
encourage divergent thinking (Liang et al., 2023), improve factuality and reasoning (Du et al., 2023),
and provide validation (Wu et al., 2023). In light of the intuition and early evidence of promise, it is
intriguing to ask the following question: how can we facilitate the development of LLM applications
that could span a broad spectrum of domains and complexities based on the multi-agent approach?

Our insight is to use multi-agent conversations to achieve it. There are at least three reasons con-
firming its general feasibility and utility thanks to recent advances in LLMs: First, because chat-
optimized LLMs (e.g., GPT-4) show the ability to incorporate feedback, LLM agents can cooperate
through conversations with each other or human(s), e.g., a dialog where agents provide and seek rea-
soning, observations, critiques, and validation. Second, because a single LLM can exhibit a broad
range of capabilities (especially when configured with the correct prompt and inference settings),
conversations between differently configured agents can help combine these broad LLM capabilities
in a modular and complementary manner. Third, LLMs have demonstrated ability to solve complex
tasks when the tasks are broken into simpler subtasks. Multi-agent conversations can enable this
partitioning and integration in an intuitive manner. How can we leverage the above insights and
support different applications with the common requirement of coordinating multiple agents, poten-
tially backed by LLMs, humans, or tools exhibiting different capacities? We desire a multi-agent
conversation framework with generic abstraction and effective implementation that has the flexibil-
ity to satisfy different application needs. Achieving this requires addressing two critical questions:
(1) How can we design individual agents that are capable, reusable, customizable, and effective in
multi-agent collaboration? (2) How can we develop a straightforward, unified interface that can
accommodate a wide range of agent conversation patterns? In practice, applications of varying
complexities may need distinct sets of agents with specific capabilities, and may require different
conversation patterns, such as single- or multi-turn dialogs, different human involvement modes, and
static vs. dynamic conversation. Moreover, developers may prefer the flexibility to program agent
interactions in natural language or code. Failing to adequately address these two questions would
limit the framework’s scope of applicability and generality.
While there is contemporaneous exploration of multi-agent approaches,3 we present AutoGen, a
generalized multi-agent conversation framework (Figure 1), based on the following new concepts.
1 Customizable and conversable agents. AutoGen uses a generic design of agents that can lever-
age LLMs, human inputs, tools, or a combination of them. The result is that developers can
easily and quickly create agents with different roles (e.g., agents to write code, execute code,
wire in human feedback, validate outputs, etc.) by selecting and configuring a subset of built-in
capabilities. The agent’s backend can also be readily extended to allow more custom behaviors.
To make these agents suitable for multi-agent conversation, every agent is made conversable –
they can receive, react, and respond to messages. When configured properly, an agent can hold
multiple turns of conversations with other agents autonomously or solicit human inputs at cer-
tain rounds, enabling human agency and automation. The conversable agent design leverages the
strong capability of the most advanced LLMs in taking feedback and making progress via chat
and also allows combining capabilities of LLMs in a modular fashion. (Section 2.1)

2 Conversation programming. A fundamental insight of AutoGen is to simplify and unify com-
plex LLM application workflows as multi-agent conversations. So AutoGen adopts a program-
ming paradigm centered around these inter-agent conversations. We refer to this paradigm as
conversation programming, which streamlines the development of intricate applications via two
primary steps: (1) defining a set of conversable agents with specific capabilities and roles (as
described above); (2) programming the interaction behavior between agents via conversation-
centric computation and control. Both steps can be achieved via a fusion of natural and pro-
gramming languages to build applications with a wide range of conversation patterns and agent
behaviors. AutoGen provides ready-to-use implementations and also allows easy extension and
experimentation for both steps. (Section 2.2)

3We refer to Appendix A for a detailed discussion.

2

AutoGen also provides a collection of multi-agent applications created using conversable agents
and conversation programming. These applications demonstrate how AutoGen can easily support
applications of various complexities and LLMs of various capabilities. Moreover, we perform both
evaluation on benchmarks and a pilot study of new applications. The results show that AutoGen can
help achieve outstanding performance on many tasks, and enable innovative ways of using LLMs,
while reducing development effort. (Section 3 and Appendix D)

2 The AutoGen Framework

To reduce the effort required for developers to create complex LLM applications across various do-
mains, a core design principle of AutoGen is to streamline and consolidate multi-agent workflows
using multi-agent conversations. This approach also aims to maximize the reusability of imple-
mented agents. This section introduces the two key concepts of AutoGen: conversable agents and
conversation programming.

2.1 Conversable Agents

In AutoGen, a conversable agent is an entity with a specific role that can pass messages to send and
receive information to and from other conversable agents, e.g., to start or continue a conversation. It
maintains its internal context based on sent and received messages and can be configured to possess
a set of capabilities, e.g., enabled by LLMs, tools, or human input, etc. The agents can act according
to programmed behavior patterns described next.

Agent capabilities powered by LLMs, humans, and tools. Since an agent’s capabilities directly
influence how it processes and responds to messages, AutoGen allows flexibility to endow its agents
with various capabilities. AutoGen supports many common composable capabilities for agents,
including 1) LLMs. LLM-backed agents exploit many capabilities of advanced LLMs such as role
playing, implicit state inference and progress making conditioned on conversation history, providing
feedback, adapting from feedback, and coding. These capabilities can be combined in different ways
via novel prompting techniques4 to increase an agent’s skill and autonomy. AutoGen also offers
enhanced LLM inference features such as result caching, error handling, message templating, etc.,
via an enhanced LLM inference layer. 2) Humans. Human involvement is desired or even essential
in many LLM applications. AutoGen lets a human participate in agent conversation via human-
backed agents, which could solicit human inputs at certain rounds of a conversation depending on
the agent configuration. The default user proxy agent allows configurable human involvement levels
and patterns, e.g., frequency and conditions for requesting human input including the option for
humans to skip providing input. 3) Tools. Tool-backed agents have the capability to execute tools
via code execution or function execution. For example, the default user proxy agent in AutoGen is
able to execute code suggested by LLMs, or make LLM-suggested function calls.

Agent customization and cooperation. Based on application-specific needs, each agent can be
configured to have a mix of basic back-end types to display complex behavior in multi-agent con-
versations. AutoGen allows easy creation of agents with specialized capabilities and roles by reusing
or extending the built-in agents. The yellow-shaded area of Figure 2 provides a sketch of the built-in
agents in AutoGen. The ConversableAgent class is the highest-level agent abstraction and, by
default, can use LLMs, humans, and tools. The AssistantAgent and UserProxyAgent are two
pre-configured ConversableAgent subclasses, each representing a common usage mode, i.e., act-
ing as an AI assistant (backed by LLMs) and acting as a human proxy to solicit human input or
execute code/function calls (backed by humans and/or tools).

In the example on the right-hand side of Figure 1, an LLM-backed assistant agent and a tool- and
human-backed user proxy agent are deployed together to tackle a task. Here, the assistant agent
generates a solution with the help of LLMs and passes the solution to the user proxy agent. Then,
the user proxy agent solicits human inputs or executes the assistant’s code and passes the results as
feedback back to the assistant.

4Appendix C presents an example of such novel prompting techniques which empowers the default LLM-

backed assistant agent in AutoGen to converse with other agents in multi-step problem solving.

3

Illustration of how to use AutoGen to program a multi-agent conversation. The top sub-
figure illustrates the built-in agents provided by AutoGen, which have unified conversation interfaces
and can be customized. The middle sub-figure shows an example of using AutoGen to develop
a two-agent system with a custom reply function. The bottom sub-figure illustrates the resulting
automated agent chat from the two-agent system during program execution.

By allowing custom agents that can converse with each other, conversable agents in AutoGen serve
as a useful building block. However, to develop applications where agents make meaningful progress
on tasks, developers also need to be able to specify and mold these multi-agent conversations.

2.2 Conversation Programming

As a solution to the above problem, AutoGen utilizes conversation programming, a paradigm that
considers two concepts: the first is computation – the actions agents take to compute their response
in a multi-agent conversation. And the second is control flow – the sequence (or conditions) un-
der which these computations happen. As we will show in the applications section, the ability to
program these helps implement many flexible multi-agent conversation patterns. In AutoGen, these
computations are conversation-centric. An agent takes actions relevant to the conversations it is
involved in and its actions result in message passing for consequent conversations (unless a termina-
tion condition is satisfied). Similarly, control flow is conversation-driven – the participating agents’
decisions on which agents to send messages to and the procedure of computation are functions of the
inter-agent conversation. This paradigm helps one to reason intuitively about a complex workflow
as agent action taking and conversation message-passing between agents.

Figure 2 provides a simple illustration. The bottom sub-figure shows how individual agents perform
their role-specific, conversation-centric computations to generate responses (e.g., via LLM inference
calls and code execution). The task progresses through conversations displayed in the dialog box.
The middle sub-figure demonstrates a conversation-based control flow. When the assistant receives
a message, the user proxy agent typically sends the human input as a reply. If there is no input, it
executes any code in the assistant’s message instead.

4

2 Initiate Conversations:A.initiate_chat(“Plot a chart of META and TESLA stock price change YTD.”, B)Assistant BUser Proxy AAutoGenAgentsDeveloper Code# This funcwill be invoked in generate_replyA.register_reply(B,  reply_func_A2B)def reply_func_A2B(msg):ouput= input_from_human()…if not ouput:if msg includes code:output = execute(msg)return outputConversableAgentAssistantAgentUserProxyAgenthuman_input_mode= “NEVER”code_execution_config= FalseDEFAULT_SYSTEM_MESSAGE = “You are a helpful AI assistant…In the following cases, suggest python code…”human_input_mode=“ALWAYS”GroupChatManagerhuman_input_mode= “NEVER”group_chat= [              ] # Note: when no reply funcis registered, a list of default reply functions will be used. Agent Customization:Program ExecutionPlot a chart of META and TESLA stock price change YTD.Execute the following code…sendreceivereceiveConversation-Centric Computationgenerate_replyError: package yfinanceis not installedsendgenerate_replySorry! Please first pip install yfinanceand then executeConversation-Driven Control Flowgenerate_replyThe Resulting Automated Agent Chat:…1.2 Register a Custom Reply Func:1.1 Define Agents:Unified Conversation Interfaces:•send•receive •generate_replyAutoGen features the following design patterns to facilitate conversation programming:

1. Unified interfaces and auto-reply mechanisms for automated agent chat. Agents in
AutoGen have unified conversation interfaces for performing the corresponding conversation-
centric computation, including a send/receive function for sending/receiving messages and a
generate reply function for taking actions and generating a response based on the received
message. AutoGen also introduces and by default adopts an agent auto-reply mechanism to
realize conversation-driven control: Once an agent receives a message from another agent, it au-
tomatically invokes generate reply and sends the reply back to the sender unless a termination
condition is satisfied. AutoGen provides built-in reply functions based on LLM inference, code
or function execution, or human input. One can also register custom reply functions to customize
the behavior pattern of an agent, e.g., chatting with another agent before replying to the sender
agent. Under this mechanism, once the reply functions are registered, and the conversation is
initialized, the conversation flow is naturally induced, and thus the agent conversation proceeds
naturally without any extra control plane, i.e., a special module that controls the conversation
flow. For example, with the developer code in the blue-shaded area (marked “Developer Code”)
of Figure 2, one can readily trigger the conversation among the agents, and the conversation
would proceed automatically, as shown in the dialog box in the grey shaded area (marked “Pro-
gram Execution”) of The auto-reply mechanism provides a decentralized, modular, and
unified way to define the workflow.

2. Control by fusion of programming and natural language. AutoGen allows the usage of
programming and natural language in various control flow management patterns: 1) Natural-
language control via LLMs. In AutoGen, one can control the conversation flow by prompting
the LLM-backed agents with natural language. For instance, the default system message of the
built-in AssistantAgent in AutoGen uses natural language to instruct the agent to fix errors
and generate code again if the previous result indicates there are errors. It also guides the agent
to confine the LLM output to certain structures, making it easier for other tool-backed agents to
consume. For example, instructing the agent to reply with “TERMINATE” when all tasks are
completed to terminate the program. More concrete examples of natural language controls can
be found in Appendix C. 2) Programming-language control. In AutoGen, Python code can be
used to specify the termination condition, human input mode, and tool execution logic, e.g., the
max number of auto replies. One can also register programmed auto-reply functions to control
the conversation flow with Python code, as shown in the code block identified as “Conversation-
Driven Control Flow” in 3) Control transition between natural and programming
language. AutoGen also supports flexible control transition between natural and programming
language. One can achieve transition from code to natural-language control by invoking an LLM
inference containing certain control logic in a customized reply function; or transition from nat-
ural language to code control via LLM-proposed function calls (Eleti et al., 2023).

In the conversation programming paradigm, one can realize multi-agent conversations of diverse
patterns. In addition to static conversation with predefined flow, AutoGen also supports dynamic
conversation flows with multiple agents. AutoGen provides two general ways to achieve this: 1)
Customized generate reply function: within the customized generate reply function, one
agent can hold the current conversation while invoking conversations with other agents depending
on the content of the current message and context. 2) Function calls: In this approach, LLM decides
whether or not to call a particular function depending on the conversation status. By messaging
additional agents in the called functions, the LLM can drive dynamic multi-agent conversation. In
addition, AutoGen supports more complex dynamic group chat via built-in GroupChatManager,
which can dynamically select the next speaker and then broadcast its response to other agents. We
elaborate on this feature and its application in Section 3. We provide implemented working systems
to showcase all these different patterns, with some of them visualized in 3 Applications of AutoGen

We demonstrate six applications using AutoGen (see Figure 3) to illustrate its potential in simplify-
ing the development of high-performance multi-agent applications. These applications are selected
based on their real-world relevance (A1, A2, A4, A5, A6), problem difficulty and solving capabil-
ities enabled by AutoGen (A1, A2, A3, A4), and innovative potential (A5, A6). Together, these
criteria showcase AutoGen’s role in advancing the LLM-application landscape.

5

Six examples of diverse applications built using AutoGen. Their conversation patterns
show AutoGen’s flexibility and power.

A1: Math Problem Solving

Mathematics is a foundational discipline and the promise of leveraging LLMs to assist with math
problem solving opens up a new plethora of applications and avenues for exploration, including per-
sonalized AI tutoring, AI research assistance, etc. This section demonstrates how AutoGen can help
develop LLM applications for math problem solving, showcasing strong performance and flexibility
in supporting various problem-solving paradigms.

(Scenario 1) We are able to build a system for autonomous math problem solving by directly reusing
two built-in agents from AutoGen. We evaluate our system and several alternative approaches,
including open-source methods such as Multi-Agent Debate (Liang et al., 2023), LangChain Re-
Act (LangChain, 2023), vanilla GPT-4, and commercial products ChatGPT + Code Interpreter, and
ChatGPT + Plugin (Wolfram Alpha), on the MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) dataset and summarize
the results in Figure 4a. We perform evaluations over 120 randomly selected level-5 problems and
on the entire5 test dataset from MATH. The results show that the built-in agents from AutoGen al-
ready yield better performance out of the box compared to the alternative approaches, even including
the commercial ones. (Scenario 2) We also showcase a human-in-the-loop problem-solving process
with the help of AutoGen. To incorporate human feedback with AutoGen, one only needs to set
human input mode=‘ALWAYS’ in the UserProxyAgent of the system in scenario 1. We demon-
strate that this system can effectively incorporate human inputs to solve challenging problems that
cannot be solved without humans. (Scenario 3) We further demonstrate a novel scenario where
multiple human users can participate in the conversations during the problem-solving process. Our
experiments and case studies for these scenarios show that AutoGen enables better performance or
new experience compared to other solutions we experimented with. Due to the page limit, details of
the evaluation, including case studies in three scenarios are in Appendix D.

A2: Retrieval-Augmented Code Generation and Question Answering

Retrieval augmentation has emerged as a practical and effective approach for mitigating the intrinsic
limitations of LLMs by incorporating external documents. In this section, we employ AutoGen to
build a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system (Lewis et al., 2020; Parvez et al., 2021)
named Retrieval-augmented Chat. The system consists of two agents: a Retrieval-augmented User
Proxy agent and a Retrieval-augmented Assistant agent, both of which are extended from built-in
agents from AutoGen. The Retrieval-augmented User Proxy includes a vector database (Chroma,

5We did not evaluate ChatGPT on the whole dataset since it requires substantial manual effort and is re-
stricted by its hourly message-number limitation. Multi-agent debate and LangChain ReAct were also not
evaluated since they underperformed vanilla GPT-4 on the smaller test set.

6

A1. Math Problem SolvingA4. Multi-agent CodingCommanderSafeguardWriterA6. Conversational ChessA2. Retrieval-augmented ChatRetrieval-augmentedAssistantRetrieval-augmentedUser ProxyChess BoardHuman/AI Chess Player AHuman/AI Chess Player BStudentAssistantAssistantExpertAsk  expertBroadcastManagerSpeakA5. Dynamic Group ChatALFWorldExecutorAssistantGrounding AgentA3. ALF Chat(a) A1: Performance on MATH (w/ GPT-4).

(b) A2: Q&A tasks (w/ GPT-3.5).

(c) A3: Performance on ALFWorld.

(d) A4: Performance on OptiGuide.

Performance on four applications A1-A4. (a) shows that AutoGen agents can be used
out of the box to achieve the most competitive performance on math problem solving tasks; (b)
shows that AutoGen can be used to realize effective retrieval augmentation and realize a novel
interactive retrieval feature to boost performance on Q&A tasks; (c) shows that AutoGen can be used
to introduce a three-agent system with a grounding agent to improve performance on ALFWorld;
(d) shows that a multi-agent design is helpful in boosting performance in coding tasks that need
safeguards.

2023) with SentenceTransformers (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) as the context retriever. A detailed
workflow description of the Retrieval-augmented Chat is provided in Appendix D.

We evaluate Retrieval-augmented Chat in both question-answering and code-generation scenarios.
(Scenario 1) We first perform an evaluation regarding natural question answering on the Natural
Questions dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) and report results in Figure 4b. In this evaluation, we
compare our system with DPR (Dense Passage Retrieval) following an existing evaluation6 prac-
tice (Adlakha et al., 2023). Leveraging the conversational design and natural-language control,
AutoGen introduces a novel interactive retrieval feature in this application: whenever the retrieved
context does not contain the information, instead of terminating, the LLM-based assistant would
reply “Sorry, I cannot find any information about... UPDATE CONTEXT.” which will invoke more
retrieval attempts. We conduct an ablation study in which we prompt the assistant agent to say “I
don’t know” instead of “UPDATE CONTEXT.” in cases where relevant information is not found,
and report results in Figure 4b. The results show that the interactive retrieval mechanism indeed
plays a non-trivial role in the process. We give a concrete example and results using this appealing
feature in Appendix D. (Scenario 2) We further demonstrate how Retrieval-augmented Chat aids in
generating code based on a given codebase that contains code not included in GPT-4’s training data.
Evaluation and demonstration details for both scenarios are included in Appendix D.

6The results of DPR with GPT-3.5 shown in Figure 4b are from (Adlakha et al., 2023). We use GPT-3.5 as

a shorthand for GPT-3.5-turbo.

7

AutoGenChatGPT+CodeChatGPT+PluginGPT-4Multi-AgentDebateLangChainReActMethods01020304050607080Success Ratio (%)52.5%48.33%45.0%30.0%26.67%23.33%69.48%55.18%120 Level-5 problemsWhole DatasetF1RecallMetrics01020304050607080Percentage (%)25.88%66.65%15.12%58.56%22.79%62.59%AutoGenAuotGen W/O interactive retrievalDPRAutoGen (3 agent)AutoGen (2 agent)ReActMethods020406080100Success Ratio (%)69%54%54%77%63%66%AverageBest of 3F1RecallMetrics020406080100Percentage (%)96.00%98.00%88.00%78.00%83.00%72.00%48.00%32.00%Multi-GPT4Single-GPT4Multi-GPT3.5Single-GPT3.5A3: Decision Making in Text World Environments

In this subsection, we demonstrate how AutoGen can be used to develop effective applications that
involve interactive or online decision making. We perform the study using the ALFWorld (Shridhar
et al., 2021) benchmark, which includes a diverse collection of synthetic language-based interactive
decision-making tasks in household environments.

With AutoGen, we implemented a two-agent system to solve tasks from ALFWorld. It consists of
an LLM-backed assistant agent responsible for suggesting plans to conduct a task and an executor
agent responsible for executing actions in the ALFWorld environments. This system integrates Re-
Act prompting (Yao et al., 2022), and is able to achieve similar performance. A common challenge
encountered in both ReAct and the AutoGen-based two-agent system is their occasional inability to
leverage basic commonsense knowledge about the physical world. This deficiency can lead to the
system getting stuck in a loop due to repetitive errors. Fortunately, the modular design of AutoGen
allows us to address this issue effectively: With AutoGen, we are able to introduce a grounding
agent, which supplies crucial commonsense knowledge–such as “You must find and take the object
before you can examine it. You must go to where the target object is before you can use it.”–whenever
the system exhibits early signs of recurring errors. It significantly enhances the system’s ability to
avoid getting entangled in error loops. We compare the task-solving performance of the two variants
of our system with GPT-3.5-turbo and ReAct7 on the 134 unseen tasks from ALFWorld and report
results in Figure 4c. The results show that introducing a grounding agent could bring in a 15%
performance gain on average. Upon examining the systems’ outputs, we observe that the grounding
agent, by delivering background commonsense knowledge at the right junctures, significantly miti-
gated the tendency of the system to persist with a flawed plan, thereby avoiding the creation of error
loops. For an example trajectory comparing the systems see Appendix D, A4: Multi-Agent Coding

In this subsection, we use AutoGen to build a multi-agent coding system based on OptiGuide (Li
et al., 2023a), a system that excels at writing code to interpret optimization solutions and answer
user questions, such as exploring the implications of changing a supply-chain decision or under-
standing why the optimizer made a particular choice. The second sub-figure of Figure 3 shows the
AutoGen-based implementation. The workflow is as follows: the end user sends questions, such as
“What if we prohibit shipping from supplier 1 to roastery 2?” to the Commander agent. The Com-
mander coordinates with two assistant agents, including the Writer and the Safeguard, to answer
the question. The Writer will craft code and send the code to the Commander. After receiving the
code, the Commander checks the code safety with the Safeguard; if cleared, the Commander will
use external tools (e.g., Python) to execute the code, and request the Writer to interpret the execution
results. For instance, the writer may say “if we prohibit shipping from supplier 1 to roastery 2, the
total cost would increase by 10.5%.” The Commander then provides this concluding answer to the
end user. If, at a particular step, there is an exception, e.g., security red flag raised by Safeguard, the
Commander redirects the issue back to the Writer with debugging information. The process might
be repeated multiple times until the user’s question is answered or timed-out.

With AutoGen the core workflow code for OptiGuide was reduced from over 430 lines to 100 lines,
leading to significant productivity improvement. We provide a detailed comparison of user expe-
rience with ChatGPT+Code Interpreter and AutoGen-based OptiGuide in Appendix D, where we
show that AutoGen-based OptiGuide could save around 3x of user’s time and reduce user interac-
tions by 3 - 5 times on average. We also conduct an ablation showing that multi-agent abstraction is
necessary. Specifically, we construct a single-agent approach where a single agent conducts both the
code-writing and safeguard processes. We tested the single- and multi-agent approaches on a dataset
of 100 coding tasks, which is crafted to include equal numbers of safe and unsafe tasks. Evaluation
results as reported in Figure 4d show that the multi-agent design boosts the F-1 score in identifying
unsafe code by 8% (with GPT-4) and 35% (with GPT-3.5-turbo).

7Results of ReAct are obtained by directly running its official code with default settings. The code uses

text-davinci-003 as backend LM and does not support GPT-3.5-turbo or GPT-4.

8

A5: Dynamic Group Chat

AutoGen provides native support for a dynamic group chat communication pattern, in which par-
ticipating agents share the same context and converse with the others in a dynamic manner instead
of following a pre-defined order. Dynamic group chat relies on ongoing conversations to guide the
flow of interaction among agents. These make dynamic group chat ideal for situations where col-
laboration without strict communication order is beneficial. In AutoGen, the GroupChatManager
class serves as the conductor of conversation among agents and repeats the following three steps:
dynamically selecting a speaker, collecting responses from the selected speaker, and broadcasting
the message (Figure 3-A5). For the dynamic speaker-selection component, we use a role-play style
prompt. Through a pilot study on 12 manually crafted complex tasks, we observed that compared
to a prompt that is purely based on the task, utilizing a role-play prompt often leads to more effec-
tive consideration of both conversation context and role alignment during the problem-solving and
speaker-selection process. Consequently, this leads to a higher success rate and fewer LLM calls.
We include detailed results in Appendix D.

A6: Conversational Chess

Using AutoGen, we developed Conversational Chess, a natural language interface game shown in
the last sub-figure of It features built-in agents for players, which can be human or LLM,
and a third-party board agent to provide information and validate moves based on standard rules.

With AutoGen, we enabled two essential features: (1) Natural, flexible, and engaging game dynam-
ics, enabled by the customizable agent design in AutoGen. Conversational Chess supports a range
of game-play patterns, including AI-AI, AI-human, and human-human, with seamless switching
between these modes during a single game. An illustrative example of these entertaining game dy-
namics can be found in Figure 15, Appendix D. (2) Grounding, which is a crucial aspect to maintain
game integrity. During gameplay, the board agent checks each proposed move for legality; if a move
is invalid, the agent responds with an error, prompting the player agent to re-propose a legal move
before continuing. This process ensures that only valid moves are played and helps maintain a con-
sistent gaming experience. As an ablation study, we removed the board agent and instead only relied
on a relevant prompt “you should make sure both you and the opponent are making legal moves” to
ground their move. The results highlighted that without the board agent, illegitimate moves caused
game disruptions. The modular design offered flexibility, allowing swift adjustments to the board
agent in response to evolving game rules or varying chess rule variants. A comprehensive demon-
stration of this ablation study is in Appendix D.

4 Discussion

We introduced an open-source library, AutoGen, that incorporates the paradigms of conversable
agents and conversation programming. This library utilizes capable agents that are well-suited for
multi-agent cooperation. It features a unified conversation interface among the agents, along with
an auto-reply mechanisms, which help establish an agent-interaction interface that capitalizes on the
strengths of chat-optimized LLMs with broad capabilities while accommodating a wide range of
applications. AutoGen serves as a general framework for creating and experimenting with multi-
agent systems that can easily fulfill various practical requirements, such as reusing, customizing,
and extending existing agents, as well as programming conversations between them.

Our experiments, as detailed in Section 3, demonstrate that this approach offers numerous benefits.
The adoption of AutoGen has resulted in improved performance (over state-of-the-art approaches),
reduced development code, and decreased manual burden for existing applications. It offers flex-
ibility to developers, as demonstrated in A1 (scenario 3), A5, and A6, where AutoGen enables
multi-agent chats to follow a dynamic pattern rather than fixed back-and-forth interactions. It allows
humans to engage in activities alongside multiple AI agents in a conversational manner. Despite the
complexity of these applications (most involving more than two agents or dynamic multi-turn agent
cooperation), the implementation based on AutoGen remains straightforward. Dividing tasks among
separate agents promotes modularity. Furthermore, since each agent can be developed, tested, and
maintained separately, this approach simplifies overall development and code management.

9

Although this work is still in its early experimental stages, it paves the way for numerous future
directions and research opportunities. For instance, we can explore effective integration of existing
agent implementations into our multi-agent framework and investigate the optimal balance between
automation and human control in multi-agent workflows. As we further develop and refine AutoGen,
we aim to investigate which strategies, such as agent topology and conversation patterns, lead to the
most effective multi-agent conversations while optimizing the overall efficiency, among other fac-
tors. While increasing the number of agents and other degrees of freedom presents opportunities for
tackling more complex problems, it may also introduce new safety challenges that require additional
studies and careful consideration.

We provide more discussion in Appendix B, including guidelines for using AutoGen and direction
of future work. We hope AutoGen will help improve many LLM applications in terms of speed of
development, ease of experimentation, and overall effectiveness and safety. We actively welcome
contributions from the broader community.

Ethics statement

There are several potential ethical considerations that could arise from the development and use of
the AutoGen framework.

• Privacy and Data Protection: The framework allows for human participation in conversations
between agents. It is important to ensure that user data and conversations are protected, and that
developers use appropriate measures to safeguard privacy.

• Bias and Fairness: LLMs have been shown to exhibit biases present in their training data (Navigli
et al., 2023). When using LLMs in the AutoGen framework, it is crucial to address and mitigate
any biases that may arise in the conversations between agents. Developers should be aware of
potential biases and take steps to ensure fairness and inclusivity.

• Accountability and Transparency: As discussed in the future work section, as the framework in-
volves multiple agents conversing and cooperating, it is important to establish clear accountability
and transparency mechanisms. Users should be able to understand and trace the decision-making
process of the agents involved in order to ensure accountability and address any potential issues
or biases.

• Trust and Reliance: AutoGen leverages human understanding and intelligence while providing
automation through conversations between agents. It is important to consider the impact of this
interaction on user experience, trust, and reliance on AI systems. Clear communication and user
education about the capabilities and limitations of the system will be essential (Cai et al., 2019).
• Unintended Consequences: As discussed before, the use of multi-agent conversations and automa-
tion in complex tasks may have unintended consequences. In particular, allowing LLM agents to
make changes in external environments through code execution or function calls, such as installing
packages, could be risky. Developers should carefully consider the potential risks and ensure that
appropriate safeguards are in place to prevent harm or negative outcomes.

Acknowledgements

The work presented in this report was made possible through discussions and feedback from Peter
Lee, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Steven Lucco, Umesh Madan, Robin Moeur, Piali Choud-
hury, Saleema Amershi, Adam Fourney, Victor Dibia, Guoqing Zheng, Corby Rosset, Ricky Loynd,
Ece Kamar, Rafah Hosn, John Langford, Ida Momennejad, Brian Krabach, Taylor Webb, Shanka
Subhra Mondal, Wei-ge Chen, Robert Gruen, Yinan Li, Yue Wang, Suman Nath, Tanakorn Leesat-
apornwongsa, Xin Wang, Shishir Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Saehan Jo, Ishai Menache, Kontantina Mel-
lou, Runlong Zhou, Feiran Jia, Hamed Khanpour, Hamid Palangi, Srinagesh Sharma, Julio Albinati
Cortez, Amin Saied, Yuzhe Ma, Dujian Ding, Linyong Nan, Prateek Yadav, Shannon Shen, Ankur
Mallick, Mark Encarnaci´on, Lars Liden, Tianwei Yue, Julia Kiseleva, Anastasia Razdaibiedina, and
Luciano Del Corro. Qingyun Wu would like to acknowledge the funding and research support from
the College of Information Science and Technology at Penn State University.

10

References

Vaibhav Adlakha, Parishad BehnamGhader, Xing Han Lu, Nicholas Meade, and Siva Reddy. Eval-
uating correctness and faithfulness of instruction-following models for question answering. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.16877, 2023.

Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Adam Fourney, Besmira Nushi, Penny Col-
lisson, Jina Suh, Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N Bennett, Kori Inkpen, et al. Guidelines for human-ai
interaction. In Proceedings of the 2019 chi conference on human factors in computing systems,
2019.

Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Man´e. Con-

crete problems in ai safety, 2016.

AutoGPT. Documentation — auto-gpt. https://docs.agpt.co/, 2023.

BabyAGI. Github — babyagi. https://github.com/yoheinakajima/babyagi, 2023.

Carrie J. Cai, Samantha Winter, David F. Steiner, Lauren Wilcox, and Michael Terry. ”hello ai”:
Uncovering the onboarding needs of medical practitioners for human-ai collaborative decision-
making. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 2019.

Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen, and Denny Zhou. Large language models as

tool makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17126, 2023.

Chroma. Chromadb. https://github.com/chroma-core/chroma, 2023.

Victor Dibia. LIDA: A tool for automatic generation of grammar-agnostic visualizations and info-
graphics using large language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), Toronto, Canada, July
2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. Self-collaboration code generation via chatgpt. arXiv

preprint arXiv:2304.07590, 2023.

Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch.

Improv-
ing factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14325, 2023.

Atty Eleti, Jeff Harris, and Logan Kilpatrick. Function calling and other api updates. https:

//openai.com/blog/function-calling-and-other-api-updates, 2023.

Guidance. Guidance. https://github.com/guidance-ai/guidance, 2023.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.03874, 2021.

Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven
Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for
multi-agent collaborative framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.

Eric Horvitz. Principles of mixed-initiative user interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference

on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1999.

HuggingFace.

Transformers agent.

transformers_agents, 2023.

https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/

Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17491, 2023.

Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a
benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2019.

11

LangChain. Introduction — langchain. https://python.langchain.com/en/latest/index.

html, 2023.

Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann N Dauphin, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Deal or no deal? end-

to-end learning for negotiation dialogues. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05125, 2017.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
Heinrich K¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt¨aschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented gen-
eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2020.

Beibin Li, Konstantina Mellou, Bo Zhang, Jeevan Pathuri, and Ishai Menache. Large language

models for supply chain optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03875, 2023a.

Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
Camel: Communicative agents for ”mind” exploration of large scale language model society,
2023b.

Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Zhaopeng
Tu, and Shuming Shi. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-
agent debate, 2023.

Evan Zheran Liu, Kelvin Guu, Panupong Pasupat, Tianlin Shi, and Percy Liang. Reinforcement
learning on web interfaces using workflow-guided exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08802,
2018.

Jerry Liu. LlamaIndex, November 2022. URL https://github.com/jerryjliu/llama_index.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.

Roberto Navigli, Simone Conia, and Bj¨orn Ross. Biases in large language models: Origins, inven-

tory and discussion. ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, 2023.

OpenAI. ChatGPT plugins. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt-plugins, 2023.

Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.

Md Rizwan Parvez, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray, and Kai-Wei Chang.
Retrieval augmented code generation and summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.11601,
2021.

Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model

connected with massive apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1908.10084.

Semantic-Kernel.

Semantic kernel.

https://github.com/microsoft/semantic-kernel,

2023.

Bokui Shen, Fei Xia, Chengshu Li, Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın, Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Claudia
P´erez-D’Arpino, Shyamal Buch, Sanjana Srivastava, Lyne Tchapmi, et al. igibson 1.0: A simu-
lation environment for interactive tasks in large realistic scenes. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2021.

Tianlin Shi, Andrej Karpathy, Linxi Fan, Jonathan Hernandez, and Percy Liang. World of bits: An
open-domain platform for web-based agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2017.

12

Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cˆot´e, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03768.

Oriol Vinyals, Timo Ewalds, Sergey Bartunov, Petko Georgiev, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets,
Michelle Yeo, Alireza Makhzani, Heinrich K¨uttler, John Agapiou, Julian Schrittwieser, et al.
Starcraft ii: A new challenge for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04782, 2017.

Chi Wang, Qingyun Wu, Markus Weimer, and Erkang Zhu. Flaml: A fast and lightweight automl

library. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 2021.

Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.

Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432, 2023b.

Daniel S. Weld and Oren Etzioni. The first law of robotics (a call to arms). In AAAI Conference on

Artificial Intelligence, 1994.

Max Woolf. Langchain problem. https://minimaxir.com/2023/07/langchain-problem/,

2023.

Yiran Wu, Feiran Jia, Shaokun Zhang, Qingyun Wu, Hangyu Li, Erkang Zhu, Yue Wang, Yin Tat
Lee, Richard Peng, and Chi Wang. An empirical study on challenging math problem solving with
gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01337, 2023.

Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents:
A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
2022.

13

A Related Work

We examine existing LLM-based agent systems or frameworks that can be used to build LLM appli-
cations. We categorize the related work into single-agent and multi-agent systems and specifically
provide a summary of differentiators comparing AutoGen with existing multi-agent systems in Ta-
ble 1. Note that many of these systems are evolving open-source projects, so the remarks and
statements about them may only be accurate as of the time of writing. We refer interested readers to
detailed LLM-based agent surveys (Xi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b)

Single-Agent Systems:

• AutoGPT: AutoGPT is an open-source implementation of an AI agent that attempts to au-
tonomously achieve a given goal (AutoGPT, 2023). It follows a single-agent paradigm in which
it augments the AI model with many useful tools, and does not support multi-agent collaboration.
• ChatGPT+ (with code interpreter or plugin): ChatGPT, a conversational AI service or agent,
can now be used alongside a code interpreter or plugin (currently available only under the pre-
mium subscription plan ChatGPT Plus) (OpenAI, 2023). The code interpreter enables ChatGPT
to execute code, while the plugin enhances ChatGPT with a wide range of curated tools.

• LangChain Agents: LangChain is a general framework for developing LLM-based applica-
tions (LangChain, 2023). LangChain Agents is a subpackage for using an LLM to choose a
sequence of actions. There are various types of agents in LangChain Agents, with the ReAct agent
being a notable example that combines reasoning and acting when using LLMs (mainly designed
for LLMs prior to ChatGPT) (Yao et al., 2022). All agents provided in LangChain Agents fol-
low a single-agent paradigm and are not inherently designed for communicative and collaborative
modes. A significant summary of its limitations can be found in (Woolf, 2023). Due to these lim-
itations, even the multi-agent systems in LangChain (e.g., re-implementation of CAMEL) are not
based on LangChain Agents but are implemented from scratch. Their connection to LangChain
lies in the use of basic orchestration modules provided by LangChain, such as AI models wrapped
by LangChain and the corresponding interface.

• Transformers Agent: Transformers Agent (HuggingFace, 2023) is an experimental natural-
language API built on the transformers repository. It includes a set of curated tools and an agent
to interpret natural language and use these tools. Similar to AutoGPT, it follows a single-agent
paradigm and does not support agent collaboration.

AutoGen differs from the single-agent systems above by supporting multi-agent LLM applications.

Multi-Agent Systems:

• BabyAGI: BabyAGI (BabyAGI, 2023) is an example implementation of an AI-powered task man-
agement system in a Python script.
In this implemented system, multiple LLM-based agents
are used. For example, there is an agent for creating new tasks based on the objective and the
result of the previous task, an agent for prioritizing the task list, and an agent for completing
tasks/sub-tasks. As a multi-agent system, BabyAGI adopts a static agent conversation pattern,
i.e., a predefined order of agent communication, while AutoGen supports both static and dynamic
conversation patterns and additionally supports tool usage and human involvement.

• CAMEL: CAMEL (Li et al., 2023b) is a communicative agent framework.

It demonstrates
how role playing can be used to let chat agents communicate with each other for task comple-
tion. It also records agent conversations for behavior analysis and capability understanding. An
Inception-prompting technique is used to achieve autonomous cooperation between agents. Un-
like AutoGen, CAMEL does not natively support tool usage, such as code execution. Although it
is proposed as an infrastructure for multi-agent conversation, it only supports static conversation
patterns, while AutoGen additionally supports dynamic conversation patterns.

• Multi-Agent Debate: Two recent works investigate and show that multi-agent debate is an effec-
tive way to encourage divergent thinking in LLMs (Liang et al., 2023) and to improve the factuality
and reasoning of LLMs (Du et al., 2023). In both works, multiple LLM inference instances are
constructed as multiple agents to solve problems with agent debate. Each agent is simply an LLM
inference instance, while no tool or human is involved, and the inter-agent conversation needs
to follow a pre-defined order. These works attempt to build LLM applications with multi-agent
conversation, while AutoGen, designed as a generic infrastructure, can be used to facilitate this
development and enable more applications with dynamic conversation patterns.

14

• MetaGPT: MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) is a specialized LLM application based on a multi-agent
conversation framework for automatic software development. They assign different roles to GPTs
to collaboratively develop software. They differ from AutoGen by being specialized solutions to
a certain scenario, while AutoGen is a generic infrastructure to facilitate building applications for
various scenarios.

There are a few other specialized single-agent or multi-agent systems, such as Voyager (Wang et al.,
2023a) and Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023), which we skip due to lower relevance. In Table 1,
we summarize differences between AutoGen and the most relevant multi-agent systems.

Table 1: Summary of differences between AutoGen and other related multi-agent systems. infras-
tructure: whether the system is designed as a generic infrastructure for building LLM applications.
conversation pattern:
the types of patterns supported by the implemented systems. Under the
‘static’ pattern, agent topology remains unchanged regardless of different inputs. AutoGen allows
flexible conversation patterns, including both static and dynamic patterns that can be customized
based on different application needs. execution-capable: whether the system can execute LLM-
generated code; human involvement: whether (and how) the system allows human participation
during the execution process of the system. AutoGen allows flexible human involvement in multi-
agent conversation with the option for humans to skip providing inputs.

Aspect
Infrastructure
Conversation pattern
Execution-capable
Human involvement

✓
flexible
✓
chat/skip

AutoGen Multi-agent Debate

✗
static
✗
✗

CAMEL BabyAGI MetaGPT
✗
static
✗
✗

✓
static
✗
✗

✗
static
✓
✗

15

B Expanded Discussion

The applications in Section 3 show how AutoGen not only enables new applications but also helps
renovate existing ones. For example, in A1 (scenario 3), A5, and A6, AutoGen enabled the cre-
ation of multi-agent conversations that follow a dynamic pattern instead of a fixed back-and-forth.
And in both A5 and A6, humans can participate in the activities together with multiple other AI
agents in a conversational manner. Similarly, A1-A4 show how popular applications can be reno-
vated quickly with AutoGen. Despite the complexity of these applications (most of them involve
more than two agents or dynamic multi-turn agent cooperation), our AutoGen-based implementa-
tion remains simple, demonstrating promising opportunities to build creative applications and a large
space for innovation. In reflecting on why these benefits can be achieved in these applications with
AutoGen, we believe there are a few reasons:

• Ease of use: The built-in agents can be used out-of-the-box, delivering strong performance even

without any customization. (A1, A3)

• Modularity: The division of tasks into separate agents promotes modularity in the system. Each
agent can be developed, tested, and maintained independently, simplifying the overall develop-
ment process and facilitating code management. (A3, A4, A5, and A6)

• Programmability: AutoGen allows users to extend/customize existing agents to develop systems
satisfying their specific needs with ease. (A1-A6). For example, with AutoGen, the core workflow
code in A4 is reduced from over 430 lines to 100 lines, for a 4x saving.

• Allowing human involvement: AutoGen provides a native mechanism to achieve human partici-
pation and/or human oversight. With AutoGen, humans can seamlessly and optionally cooperate
with AIs to solve problems or generally participate in the activity. AutoGen also facilitates inter-
active user instructions to ensure the process stays on the desired path. (A1, A2, A5, and A6)
• Collaborative/adversarial agent interactions: Like many collaborative agent systems (Dong
et al., 2023), agents in AutoGen can share information and knowledge, to complement each other’s
abilities and collectively arrive at better solutions. (A1, A2, A3, and A4). Analogously, in certain
scenarios, some agents are required to work in an adversarial way. Relevant information is shared
among different conversations in a controlled manner, preventing distraction or hallucination. (A4,
A6). AutoGen supports both patterns, enabling effective utilization and augmentation of LLMs.

B.1 General Guidelines for Using AutoGen

Below we give some recommendations for using agents in AutoGen to accomplish a task.

1. Consider using built-in agents first. For example, AssistantAgent is pre-configured to be
backed by GPT-4, with a carefully designed system message for generic problem-solving via
code. The UserProxyAgent is configured to solicit human inputs and perform tool execution.
Many problems can be solved by simply combining these two agents. When customizing agents
for an application, consider the following options: (1) human input mode, termination condition,
code execution configuration, and LLM configuration can be specified when constructing an
agent; (2) AutoGen supports adding instructions in an initial user message, which is an effective
way to boost performance without needing to modify the system message; (3) UserProxyAgent
can be extended to handle different execution environments and exceptions, etc.; (4) when sys-
tem message modification is needed, consider leveraging the LLM’s capability to program its
conversation flow with natural language.

2. Start with a simple conversation topology. Consider using the two-agent chat or the group chat
setup first, as they can often be extended with the least code. Note that the two-agent chat can
be easily extended to involve more than two agents by using LLM-consumable functions in a
dynamic way.

3. Try to reuse built-in reply methods based on LLM, tool, or human before implementing a
custom reply method because they can often be reused to achieve the goal in a simple way
(e.g., the built-in agent GroupChatManager’s reply method reuses the built-in LLM-based reply
function when selecting the next speaker, ref. A5 in Section 3).

4. When developing a new application with UserProxyAgent, start with humans always in
the loop, i.e., human input mode=‘ALWAYS’, even if the target operation mode is more au-
tonomous. This helps evaluate the effectiveness of AssistantAgent, tuning the prompt, dis-
covering corner cases, and debugging. Once confident with small-scale success, consider setting

16

human input mode = ‘NEVER’. This enables LLM as a backend, and one can either use the
LLM or manually generate diverse system messages to simulate different use cases.

5. Despite the numerous advantages of AutoGen agents, there could be cases/scenarios where other
libraries/packages could help. For example: (1) For (sub)tasks that do not have requirements
for back-and-forth trouble-shooting, multi-agent interaction, etc., a unidirectional (no back-and-
forth message exchange) pipeline can also be orchestrated with LangChain (LangChain, 2023),
LlamaIndex (Liu, 2022), Guidance (Guidance, 2023), Semantic Kernel (Semantic-Kernel, 2023),
Gorilla (Patil et al., 2023) or low-level inference API (‘autogen.oai’ provides an enhanced LLM
inference layer at this level) (Dibia, 2023). (2) When existing tools from LangChain etc. are
helpful, one can use them as tool backends for AutoGen agents. For example, one can readily use
tools, e.g., Wolfram Alpha, from LangChain in AutoGen agent. (3) For specific applications, one
may want to leverage agents implemented in other libraries/packages. To achieve this, one could
wrap those agents as conversable agents in AutoGen and then use them to build LLM applications
through multi-agent conversation. (4) It can be hard to find an optimal operating point among
many tunable choices, such as the LLM inference configuration. Blackbox optimization packages
like ‘flaml.tune’ (Wang et al., 2021) can be used together with AutoGen to automate such tuning.

B.2 Future Work

This work raises many research questions and future directions and .

Designing optimal multi-agent workflows: Creating a multi-agent workflow for a given task can
involve many decisions, e.g., how many agents to include, how to assign agent roles and agent
capabilities, how the agents should interact with each other, and whether to automate a particular
part of the workflow. There may not exist a one-fits-all answer, and the best solution might depend
on the specific application. This raises important questions: For what types of tasks and applications
are multi-agent workflows most useful? How do multiple agents help in different applications? For
a given task, what is the optimal (e.g., cost-effective) multi-agent workflow?

Creating highly capable agents: AutoGen can enable the development of highly capable agents
that leverage the strengths of LLMs, tools, and humans. Creating such agents is crucial to ensuring
that a multi-agent workflow can effectively troubleshoot and make progress on a task. For example,
we observed that CAMEL, another multi-agent LLM system, cannot effectively solve problems in
most cases primarily because it lacks the capability to execute tools or code. This failure shows that
LLMs and multi-agent conversations with simple role playing are insufficient, and highly capable
agents with diverse skill sets are essential. We believe that more systematic work will be required to
develop guidelines for application-specific agents, to create a large OSS knowledge base of agents,
and to create agents that can discover and upgrade their skills (Cai et al., 2023).

Enabling scale, safety, and human agency: Section 3 shows how complex multi-agent workflows
can enable new applications, and future work will be needed to assess whether scaling further can
help solve extremely complex tasks. However, as these workflows scale and grow more complex,
it may become difficult to log and adjust them. Thus, it will become essential to develop clear
mechanisms and tools to track and debug their behavior. Otherwise, these techniques risk resulting
in incomprehensible, unintelligible chatter among agents (Lewis et al., 2017).

Our work also shows how complex, fully autonomous workflows with AutoGen can be useful, but
fully autonomous agent conversations will need to be used with care. While the autonomous mode
AutoGen supports could be desirable in many scenarios, a high level of autonomy can also pose
potential risks, especially in high-risk applications (Amodei et al., 2016; Weld & Etzioni, 1994). As
a result, building fail-safes against cascading failures and exploitation, mitigating reward hacking,
out of control and undesired behaviors, maintaining effective human oversight of applications built
with AutoGen agents will become important. While AutoGen provides convenient and seamless
involvement of humans through a user proxy agent, developers and stakeholders still need to under-
stand and determine the appropriate level and pattern of human involvement to ensure the safe and
ethical use of the technology (Horvitz, 1999; Amershi et al., 2019).

17

C Default System Message for Assistant Agent

Default system message for the built-in assistant agent in AutoGen (v0.1.1). This is an
example of conversation programming via natural language. It contains instructions of different
types, including role play, control flow, output confine, facilitate automation, and grounding.

Figure 5 shows the default system message for the built-in assistant agent in AutoGen (v0.1.1),
where we introduce several new prompting techniques and highlight them accordingly. When com-
bining these new prompting techniques together, we can program a fairly complex conversation even
with the simplest two-agent conversation topology. This approach tries to exploit the capability of
LLMs in implicit state inference to a large degree. LLMs do not follow all the instructions perfectly,
so the design of the system needs to have other mechanisms to handle the exceptions and faults.
Some instructions can have ambiguities, and the designer should either reduce them for preciseness
or intentionally keep them for flexibility and address the different situations in other agents.
In
general, we observe that GPT-4 follows the instructions better than GPT-3.5-turbo.

18

SystemMessageYou are a helpful AI assistant. Solve tasks using your coding and language skills.In the following cases, suggest python code (in a python coding block) or shell script (in a shcoding block) for the user to execute.1. When you need to collect info, use the code to output the info you need, for example, browse or search the web, download/read a file, print the content of a webpage or a file, get the current date/time. After sufficient info is printed and the task is ready to be solved based on your language skill, you can solve the task by yourself.2. When you need to perform some task with code, use the code to perform the task and output theresult. Finish the task smartly.Solve the task step by step if you need to. If a plan is not provided, explain your plan first. Be clear which step uses code, and which step uses your language skill.When using code, you must indicate the script type in the code block. The user cannot provide any other feedback or perform any other action beyond executing the code you suggest. The user can’t modify your code. So do not suggest incomplete code which requires users to modify. Don’t use a code block if it’s not intended to be executed by the user.If you want the user to save the code in a file before executing it, put # filename: <filename> inside the code block as the first line. Don’t include multiple code blocks in one response. Do not ask users to copy and paste the result. Instead, use ’print’ function for the output when relevant. Check the execution result returned by the user.If the result indicates there is an error, fix the error and output the code again. Suggest the full code instead of partial code or code changes. If the error can’t be fixed or if the task is not solved even after the code is executed successfully, analyze the problem, revisit your assumption, collect additional info you need, and think of a different approach to try.When you find an answer, verify the answer carefully. Include verifiable evidence in your response if possible.Reply “TERMINATE” in the end when everything is done.Prompting techniques color code: Role Play; Control Flow; Output Confine; Facilitate Automation; GroundingD Application Details

A1: Math Problem Solving

Scenario 1: Autonomous Problem Solving. We perform both qualitative and quantitative eval-
uations in this scenario. For all evaluations, we use GPT-4 as the base model, and pre-install the
“sympy” package in the execution environment. We compare AutoGen with the following LLM-
based agent systems:

• AutoGPT: The out-of-box AutoGPT is used. We initialize AutoGPT by setting the purpose to

“solve math problems”, resulting in a “MathSolverGPT” with auto-generated goals.

• ChatGPT+Plugin: We enable the Wolfram Alpha plugin (a math computation engine) in the Ope-

nAI web client.

• ChatGPT+Code Interpreter: This is a recent feature in OpenAI web client. Note that the above
two premium features from ChatGPT require a paid subscription to be accessed and are the most
competitive commercial systems.

• LangChain ReAct+Python: We use Python agent from LangChain. To handle parsing errors, we

set “handle parsing errors=True”, and use the default zero-shot ReAct prompt.

• Multi-Agent Debate (Liang et al., 2023): We modified the code of the multi-agent debate to per-
form evaluation. By default, there are three agents: an affirmative agent, a negative agent, and a
moderator.

We also conducted preliminary evaluations on several other multi-agent systems,
including
BabyAGI, CAMEL, and MetaGPT. The results indicate that they are not suitable choices for solving
math problems out of the box. For instance, when MetaGPT is tasked with solving a math problem,
it begins developing software to address the problem, but most of the time, it does not actually solve
the problem. We have included the test examples in Appendix E.

Table 2: Qualitative evaluation of two math problems from the MATH dataset within the autonomous
problem-solving scenario. Each LLM-based system is tested three times on each of the problems.
This table reports the problem-solving correctness and summarizes the reasons for failure.

AutoGen
AutoGPT

ChatGPT+Plugin

ChatGPT+Code Interpreter
LangChain ReAct
Multi-Agent Debate

Correctness
3/3
0/3

1/3

2/3
0/3
0/3

Failure Reason
N/A.
The LLM gives code without the print function so the
result is not printed.
The return from Wolfram Alpha contains 2 simplified
results, including the correct answer, but GPT-4 always
chooses the wrong answer.
Returns a wrong decimal result.
LangChain gives 3 different wrong answers.
It gives 3 different wrong answers due to calculation errors.

(a) Evaluation on the first problem that asks to simplify a square root fraction.

AutoGen
AutoGPT

ChatGPT+Plugin

ChatGPT+Code Interpreter
LangChain ReAct
Multi-Agent Debate

Correctness
2/3
0/3

1/3

0/3
0/3
0/3

Failure Reason
The final answer from code execution is wrong.
The LLM gives code without the print function so the
result is not printed.
For one trial, GPT-4 got stuck because it keeps giving
wrong queries and has to be stopped. Another trial simply
gives a wrong answer.
It gives 3 different wrong answers.
LangChain gives 3 different wrong answers.
It gives 3 different wrong answers.

(b) Evaluation on the second number theory problem.

For the qualitative evaluation, we utilize two level-5 problems from the MATH dataset, testing each
problem three times. The first problem involves simplifying a square root fraction, and the second

19

problem involves solving a number theory issue. The correctness counts and reasons for failure
are detailed in Table 2. For the quantitative evaluation, we conduct two sets of experiments on
the MATH dataset to assess the correctness of these systems: (1) an experiment involving 120
level-5 (the most challenging level) problems, including 20 problems from six categories, excluding
geometry, and (2) an experiment on the entire test set, which includes 5000 problems. We exclude
AutoGPT from this evaluation as it cannot access results from code executions and does not solve
any problems in the qualitative evaluation. Our analysis of the entire dataset reveals that AutoGen
achieves an overall accuracy of 69.48%, while GPT-4’s accuracy stands at 55.18%. From these
evaluations, we have the following observations regarding the problem-solving success rate and
user experience of these systems:

• Problem-solving success rate: Results from the quantitative evaluations show that AutoGen can
help achieve the highest problem-solving success rate among all the compared methods. The qual-
itative evaluations elucidate common failure reasons across several alternative approaches. Chat-
GPT+Code Interpreter fails to solve the second problem, and ChatGPT+Plugin struggles to solve
both problems. AutoGPT fails on both problems due to code execution issues. The LangChain
agent also fails on both problems, producing code that results in incorrect answers in all trials.
• Based on the qualitative evaluation, we analyze the user experience concerning the verbosity of
the response and the ability of the LLM-based system to run without unexpected behaviors. Chat-
GPT+Plugin is the least verbose, mainly because Wolfram queries are much shorter than Python
code. AutoGen, ChatGPT+Code Interpreter, and LangChain exhibit similar verbosity, although
LangChain is slightly more verbose due to more code execution errors. AutoGPT is the most
verbose system owing to predefined steps like THOUGHTS, REASONING, and PLAN, which it
includes in replies every time. Overall, AutoGen and ChatGPT+Code Interpreter operate smoothly
without exceptions. We note the occurrences of undesired behaviors from other LLM-based sys-
tems that could affect user experience: AutoGPT consistently outputs code without the print’
statement and cannot correct this, requiring the user to run them manually; ChatGPT with Wol-
fram Alpha plugin has the potential to become stuck in a loop that must be manually stopped; and
Langchain ReAct could exit with a parse error, necessitating the passing of a ‘handle parse error’
parameter.

Examples of three settings utilized to solve math problems using AutoGen: (Gray) En-
ables a workflow where a student collaborates with an assistant agent to solve problems, either
autonomously or in a human-in-the-loop mode. (Gray + Orange) Facilitates a more sophisticated
workflow wherein the assistant, on the fly, can engage another user termed “expert”, who is in the
loop with their own assistant agent, to aid in problem-solving if its own solutions are not satisfactory.

Scenario 2: Human-in-the-loop Problem Solving. For challenging problems that these LLM
systems cannot solve autonomously, human feedback during the problem-solving process can be

20

Enable Multi-User Problem Solving ViaStudent        and Expert Student ProxyStudentAssistantExpertAssistantExpert ProxyAsk for expertEnable Autonomous and Human-in-the-loop Problem Solvinghelpful. To incorporate human feedback with AutoGen, one can set human input mode=‘ALWAYS’
in the user proxy agent. We select one challenging problem that none of these systems can solve
autonomously across three trials. We adhere to the process outlined below to provide human inputs
for all the compared methods:

1. Input the problem: Find the equation of the plane which bisects the angle
between the planes 3x − 6y + 2z + 5 = 0 and 4x − 12y + 3z − 3 = 0, and which
contains the point (−5, −1, −5). Enter your answer in the form

Ax + By + Cz + D = 0,

where A, B, C, D are integers such that A
gcd(|A|, |B|, |C|, |D|) = 1.

>

0 and

2. The response from the system does not solve the problem correctly. We then give a
hint to the model: Your idea is not correct.
Let’s solve this together.
Suppose P = (x, y, z) is a point that lies on a plane that bisects the
angle, the distance from P to the two planes is the same.
set up this equation first.

Please

3. We expect the system to give the correct distance equation. Since the equation involves
an absolute sign that is hard to solve, we would give the next hint: Consider the two
cases to remove the abs sign and get two possible solutions.

4. If the system returns the two possible solutions and doesn’t continue to the next step, we
give the last hint: Use point (-5,-1,-5) to determine which is correct and
give the final answer.

5. Final answer is 11x+6y+5z+86=0 .

We observed that AutoGen consistently solved the problem across all three trials. ChatGPT+Code
Interpreter and ChatGPT+Plugin managed to solve the problem in two out of three trials, while Au-
toGPT failed to solve it in all three attempts. In its unsuccessful attempt, ChatGPT+Code Interpreter
failed to adhere to human hints. In its failed trial, ChatGPT+Plugin produced an almost correct solu-
tion but had a sign discrepancy in the final answer. AutoGPT was unable to yield a correct solution
in any of the trials. In one trial, it derived an incorrect distance equation. In the other two trials, the
final answer was incorrect due to code execution errors.

Scenario 3: Multi-User Problem Solving. Next-generation LLM applications may necessitate
the involvement of multiple real users for collectively solving a problem with the assistance of
LLMs. We showcase how AutoGen can be leveraged to effortlessly construct such a system. Specif-
ically, building upon scenario 2 mentioned above, we aim to devise a simple system involving two
human users: a student and an expert. In this setup, the student interacts with an LLM assistant to
address some problems, and the LLM automatically resorts to the expert when necessary.

The overall workflow is as follows: The student chats with the LLM-based assistant agent through
a student proxy agent to solve problems. When the assistant cannot solve the problem satisfactorily,
or the solution does not match the expectation of the student, it would automatically hold the con-
versation and call the pre-defined ask for expert function via the function call feature of GPT
in order to resort to the expert. Specifically, it would automatically produce the initial message for
the ask for expert function, which could be the statement of the problem or the request to verify
the solution to a problem, and the expert is supposed to respond to this message with the help of
the expert assistant. After the conversation between the expert and the expert’s assistant, the final
message would be sent back to the student assistant as the response to the initial message. Then, the
student assistant would resume the conversation with the student using the response from the expert
for a better solution. A detailed visualization is shown in With AutoGen, constructing the student/expert proxy agent and the assistant agents is straight-
forward by reusing the built-in UserProxyAgent and AssistantAgent through appropriate
configurations. The only development required involves writing several lines of code for the
ask for expert function, which then becomes part of the configuration for the assistant. Ad-
ditionally, it’s easy to extend such a system to include more than one expert, with a specific
ask for expert function for each, or to include multiple student users with a shared expert for
consultation.

21

A2: Retrieval-Augmented Code Generation and Question Answering

Overview of Retrieval-augmented Chat which involves two agents, including a Retrieval-
augmented User Proxy and a Retrieval-augmented Assistant. Given a set of documents, the
Retrieval-augmented User Proxy first automatically processes documents—splits, chunks, and stores
them in a vector database. Then for a given user input, it retrieves relevant chunks as context and
sends it to the Retrieval-augmented Assistant, which uses LLM to generate code or text to answer
questions. Agents converse until they find a satisfactory answer.

Detailed Workflow. The workflow of Retrieval-Augmented Chat is illustrated in To
use Retrieval-augmented Chat, one needs to initialize two agents including Retrieval-augmented
User Proxy and Retrieval-augmented Assistant. Initializing the Retrieval-Augmented User Proxy
necessitates specifying a path to the document collection. Subsequently, the Retrieval-Augmented
User Proxy can download the documents, segment them into chunks of a specific size, compute
embeddings, and store them in a vector database. Once a chat is initiated, the agents collaboratively
engage in code generation or question-answering adhering to the procedures outlined below:

1. The Retrieval-Augmented User Proxy retrieves document chunks based on the embedding simi-

larity, and sends them along with the question to the Retrieval-Augmented Assistant.

2. The Retrieval-Augmented Assistant employs an LLM to generate code or text as answers based
on the question and context provided. If the LLM is unable to produce a satisfactory response, it
is instructed to reply with “Update Context” to the Retrieval-Augmented User Proxy.

3. If a response includes code blocks, the Retrieval-Augmented User Proxy executes the code and
sends the output as feedback. If there are no code blocks or instructions to update the context, it
terminates the conversation. Otherwise, it updates the context and forwards the question along
with the new context to the Retrieval-Augmented Assistant. Note that if human input solicitation
is enabled, individuals can proactively send any feedback, including Update Context”, to the
Retrieval-Augmented Assistant.

4. If the Retrieval-Augmented Assistant receives “Update Context”, it requests the next most similar
chunks of documents as new context from the Retrieval-Augmented User Proxy. Otherwise, it
generates new code or text based on the feedback and chat history. If the LLM fails to generate
an answer, it replies with “Update Context” again. This process can be repeated several times.
The conversation terminates if no more documents are available for the context.

We utilize Retrieval-Augmented Chat in two scenarios. The first scenario aids in generating code
based on a given codebase. While LLMs possess strong coding abilities, they are unable to utilize
packages or APIs that are not included in their training data, e.g., private codebases, or have trouble
using trained ones that are frequently updated post-training. Hence, Retrieval-Augmented Code
Generation is considered to be highly valuable. The second scenario involves question-answering
on the Natural Questions dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), enabling us to obtain comparative
evaluation metrics for the performance of our system.

Scenario 1: Evaluation on Natural Questions QA dataset.
In this case, we evaluate the
Retrieval-Augmented Chat’s end-to-end question-answering performance using the Natural Ques-
tions dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019). We collected 5,332 non-redundant context documents and
6,775 queries from HuggingFace. First, we create a document collection based on the entire context
corpus and store it in the vector database. Then, we utilize Retrieval-Augmented Chat to answer the
questions. An example (Figure 8) from the NQ dataset showcases the advantages of the interactive
retrieval feature: “who carried the usa flag in opening ceremony”. When attempting to answer
this question, the context with the highest similarity to the question embedding does not contain the

22

Retrieval-augmentedAssistantRetrieval-augmented  User Proxy1. Question and Contexts3. Terminate,feedbacks or `Update Context`4. Satisfied Answers or Terminate2. Satisfied Answers or `Update Context`Retrieval-augmented Chat without (W/O) and with (W/) interactive retrieval.

required information for a response. As a result, the LLM assistant (GPT-3.5-turbo) replies “Sorry,
I cannot find any information about who carried the USA flag in the opening ceremony. UPDATE
CONTEXT.” With the unique and innovative ability to update context in Retrieval-Augmented Chat,
the user proxy agent automatically updates the context and forwards it to the assistant agent again.
Following this process, the agent is able to generate the correct answer to the question.

In addition, we conduct an experiment using the same prompt as illustrated in (Adlakha et al., 2023)
to investigate the advantages of AutoGen W/O interactive retrieval. The F1 score and Recall for the
first 500 questions are 23.40% and 62.60%, respectively, aligning closely with the results reported
in Figure 4b. Consequently, we assert that AutoGen W/O interactive retrieval outperforms DPR due
to differences in the retrievers employed. Specifically, we utilize a straightforward vector search
retriever with the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model for embeddings.

Furthermore, we analyze the number of LLM calls in experiments involving both AutoGen and
AutoGen W/O interactive retrieval, revealing that approximately 19.4% of questions in the Natural
Questions dataset trigger an “Update Context” operation, resulting in additional LLM calls.

Scenario 2: Code Generation Leveraging Latest APIs from the Codebase. In this case, the ques-
tion is “How can I use FLAML to perform a classification task and use Spark for parallel training?
Train for 30 seconds and force cancel jobs if the time limit is reached.”. FLAML (v1) (Wang et al.,
2021) is an open-source Python library designed for efficient AutoML and tuning. It was open-
sourced in December 2020, and is included in the training data of GPT-4. However, the question
necessitates the use of Spark-related APIs, which were added in December 2022 and are not encom-
passed in the GPT-4 training data. Consequently, the original GPT-4 model is unable to generate the
correct code, due to its lack of knowledge regarding Spark-related APIs. Instead, it erroneously cre-
ates a non-existent parameter, spark, and sets it to True’. Nevertheless, with Retrieval-Augmented
Chat, we provide the latest reference documents as context. Then, GPT-4 generates the correct code
blocks by setting use spark and f orce cancel to True’.

23

Task description who carried the usaflag in opening ceremony?Assistant: You’re a retrieve augmented chatbot. You answer user’s questions based on your own knowledge and the context provided by the user. If you can’t answer the question with or without the current context, you should reply exactly ‘UPDATE CONTEXT’. You must give as short an answer as possible.User’s question is: who carried the usaflag in opening ceremonyContext is: < P > On January 17 , 1899 , under ... The Astros beat the Yankees that night , 2 -1 . < /P >UserProxy: Sorry, I cannot find any information about who carried the USA flag in the opening ceremony. UPDATE CONTEXT.Assistant: You’re a retrieve augmented chatbot. You answer user’s questions based on your own knowledge and the context provided by the user. If you can’t answer the question with or without the current context, you should reply exactly ‘UPDATE CONTEXT’. You must give as short an answer as possible.User’s question is: who carried the usaflag in opening ceremonyContext is: < T able > ... Erin Hamlin ... < /T d >UserProxy: Erin Hamlin carried the USA flag in the opening ceremony. (a) W/O Interactive Retrieval(b) W/ Interactive RetrievalAssistant: You’re a retrieve augmented chatbot. You answer user’s questions based on your own knowledge and the context provided by the user. If you can’t answer the question with or without the current context, you should reply ‘sorry, I don’t know’. You must give as short an answer as possible.User’s question is:who carried the usaflag in opening ceremonyContext is: < P > On January 17 , 1899 , under ... The Astros beat the Yankees that night , 2 -1 . < /P >UserProxy: Sorry, I cannot find any information about who carried the USA flag in the opening ceremony. Sorry, I don’t know.A3: Decision Making in Text World Environments

We use AutoGen to solve tasks in the ALFWorld benchmark, which contains household
tasks described in natural language. We propose two designs: a two-agent design where the assistant
agent suggests the next step, and the Executor executes actions and provides feedback. The three-
agent design adds a grounding agent that supplies commonsense facts to the executor when needed.

ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021) is a synthetic language-based interactive decision-making task.
It comprises textual environments that aim to simulate real-world household scenes. Given a high-
level goal (e.g., putting a hot apple in the fridge) and the description of the household environment,
the agent needs to explore and interact with the simulated household environment through a textual
interface. A typical task environment contains various types of locations and could require more
than 40 steps to finish, which highlights the need for agents to decompose the goal into subtasks and
tackle them one by one, while effectively exploring the environments.

Detailed Workflow. We first propose a straightforward two-agent system with AutoGen, illustrated
on the left-hand side of Figure 9, to tackle tasks from this benchmark. The system consists of
an assistant agent and an executor agent. The assistant agent generates plans and makes action
decisions to solve the tasks. The executor agent is tailored specifically for ALFWorld. It performs
actions proposed by the assistant and reports action execution results in the household environment
as feedback to the assistant. Due to the strict format requirements for the output format, we use the
BLEU metric to evaluate the similarity of the output to all valid action options. The option with the
highest similarity will be chosen as the action for this round.

One major challenge encompassed in ALFWorld is commonsense reasoning. The agent needs to
extract patterns from the few-shot examples provided and combine them with the agent’s general
knowledge of household environments to fully understand task rules. More often than not, the as-
sistant tends to neglect some basic knowledge of the household environment. Thanks to the easy-to-
implement multi-agent conversational feature of AutoGen, enhancing the assistant agent’s reason-
ing ability by adding a new grounding agent to provide commonsense facts for the decision-making
agent’s reference becomes straightforward. By scrutinizing the failed attempts and summarizing the
reasons for failure, we obtained a holistic understanding of the commonsense knowledge that the
assistant agent lacks. Then, we set a grounding agent to provide this general knowledge when the
task begins and whenever the assistant outputs the same action three times in a row. This ensures the
assistant takes this commonsense knowledge into consideration and prevents it from getting stuck in
outputting the same content or constantly apologizing.

We compare our system’s performance with ReAct, which treats ALFWorld as a text-completion
task. ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) is a few-shot prompting technique that interleaves reasoning and
acting, allowing for greater synergy between the two and significantly improving performance on
both language and decision-making tasks. We integrate ReAct into AutoGen by modifying the
prompts in a conversational manner. Following ReAct, we employ a two-shot setting. The few-
shot prompts are obtained from the corresponding repository. As shown in Table 3, the two-agent

24

ALFWorldExecutorReward & StateAction DecisionAssistantObservation: On the desk 2, you see an alarmclock3, a bowl 3, a creditcard2, a mug 1, and a pencil 2.Action decision: Pick up pencil 2 from desk 2GroundingAgentALFChat(two agents)ALFChat(three agents)ALFWorldExecutorAssistantComparison of results from two designs: (a) Two-agent design which consists of an
assistant and an executor, (b) Three-agent design which adds a grounding agent that serves as a
knowledge source. For simplicity, we omit the in-context examples and part of the exploration
trajectory, and only show parts contributing to the failure/success of the attempt.

